Crowdsourcing open citations with CROCI 

An analysis of the current status of open citations, and a proposal 

Ivan Heibi1, Silvio Peroni1 and David Shotton2 

Digital Humanities Advanced Research Centre (DHARC), Department of Classical Philology and Italian Studies, 

University of Bologna, via Zamboni 32, 40126 Bologna (Italy) 

1 {ivan.heibi2, silvio.peroni}@unibo.it 

Oxford e-Research Centre, University of Oxford, 7 Keble Rd, Oxford OX1 3QG (United Kingdom) 

2 david.shotton @oerc.ox.ac.uk 

Abstract 
In this paper, we analyse the current availability of open citations data in one particular dataset, namely COCI (the 
OpenCitations  Index  of  Crossref  open  DOI-to-DOI  citations;  http://opencitations.net/index/coci)  provided  by 
OpenCitations. The results of these analyses show a persistent gap in the coverage of the currently available open 
citation data. In order to address this specific issue, we propose a strategy whereby the community (e.g. scholars and 
publishers) can directly involve themselves in crowdsourcing open citations, by uploading their citation data via the 
OpenCitations infrastructure into our new index, CROCI, the Crowdsourced Open Citations Index. 

and 

such 

initiatives 

as  OpenCitations 

Introduction 
The availability of open scholarly citations is a public good, which is of intrinsic value to the 
academic world as a whole (Shotton, 2013; Peroni et al. 2015; Shotton, 2018), and is particularly 
crucial  for  the  scientometrics  and  informetrics  community,  since  it  supports  reproducibility 
(Sugimoto et al., 2017) and enables fairness in research by removing such citation data from behind 
commercial paywalls(Schiermeier, 2017). Despite the positive early outcome of the Initiative for 
Open Citations (I4OC, https://i4oc.org/), namely that almost all major scholarly publishers now 
release their publication reference lists, with the result that more than 500 million citations are now 
open via the Crossref API (https://api.crossref.org), and despite the related ongoing efforts of sister 
infrastructures 
and 
WikiCite/Wikidata (https://www.wikidata.org), many scholarly citations are not freely available. 
While these initiatives have the potential to disrupt the traditional landscape of citation availability, 
which for the past half-century has been dominated by commercial interests, the present incomplete 
coverage of open citation data is one of the most significant impediments to open scholarship (van 
Eck et al., 2018).   
In this work, we analyse the current availability of open citations data (Peroni and Shotton, 2018) 
within one particular dataset, namely COCI (the OpenCitations Index of Crossref open DOI-to-
DOI citations; http://opencitations.net/index/coci). This dataset is provided by OpenCitations, a 
scholarly infrastructure organization dedicated to open scholarship and the publication of open 
bibliographic and citation data by the use of Semantic Web (Linked Data) technologies. Launched 
in 
Indexes  proposed  by  OpenCitations 
(http://opencitations.net/index)  in  which  citations  are  exposed  as  first-class  data  entities  with 
accompanying properties. It has already seen widespread usage (over nine hundred thousands API 
calls since launch, with half of these in January 2019), and has been adopted by external services 
such as VOSviewer (van Eck and Waltman, 2010).  
In particular, in this paper we address the following research questions (RQs): 

(http://opencitations.net) 

July  2018,  COCI 

1.  What  is  the  ratio  between  open  citations  vs.  closed  citations  within  each  category  of 
scholarly entities included in COCI (i.e. journals, books, proceedings, datasets, and others)? 
2.  Which are the top twenty publishers in terms of the number of open citations received by 

first  of 

the 

the 

is 

their own publications, according to the citation data available in COCI? 

3.  To  what  degree  are  the  publishers  highlighted  in  the  previous  analysis  themselves 

contributing to the open citations movement, according to the data available in Crossref? 

The results of these analyses show a persistent gap in the coverage of the currently available open 
citation data. To address this specific issue, we have developed a novel strategy whereby members 

of the community of scholars, authors, editors and publishers can directly involve themselves in 
crowdsourcing open citations, by uploading their citation data via the OpenCitations infrastructure 
into our new index, CROCI, the Crowdsourced Open Citations  Index. 

Methods and material 
To answer the RQs mentioned above, we used open data and technologies coming from various 
parties. Specifically, the open CC0 citation data we used came from the CSV dump of most recent 
release of COCI dated 12 November 2018 (OpenCitations, 2018), which contains 449,840,503 
DOI-to-DOI citation links between 46,534,705 distinct bibliographic entities. The Crossref dump 
we used for the production of this most recent version of COCI was dated 3 October 2018, and 
included all the Crossref citation data available at that time in both the ‘open’ dataset (accessible 
by all) and the ‘limited’ dataset (accessible only to users of the Crossref Cited-by service and to 
Metadata  Plus  members  of  Crossref,  of  which  OpenCitations  is  one  –  for  details,  see 
https://www.crossref.org/reference-distribution/). 
We  additionally  extracted  information  about  the  number  of  closed  citations  to  each  of  the 
99,444,883  DOI-identified  entities  available  in  the  October  Crossref  dump.  This  number  was 
calculated by subtracting the number of open citations to each entity available within COCI from 
the value “is-referenced-by-count” available in the Crossref metadata for that particular cited entity, 
which reports all the DOI-to-DOI citation links that point to the cited entity from within the whole 
Crossref database (including those present in the Crossref ‘closed’ dataset).  
Furthermore, we extracted the particular publication type of each entity, so as to identify it either 
as a journal article, or as a book chapter, etc. We determined these publication types for all the 
DOI-identified entities available in the Crossref dump we used. We then identified the publisher of 
each entity, by querying the Crossref API using the entity’s DOI prefix. This allowed us to group 
the  number  of  open  citations  and  closed  citations  to  the  articles  published  by  that  particular 
publisher, and to determine the top twenty publishers in terms of the number of open citations that 
their own publications had received.  
Finally, we again queried the Crossref API, this time using the DOI prefixes of the citing entities, 
to check the participation of these top twenty publishers in terms of the number of open citations 
they were themselves publishing in response to the open citation movement sponsored by I4OC. 
Details of all these analyses are available online in CC0 (Heibi et al., 2019). 

Results 
First (RQ1) we determined the numbers of open citations and closed citations received by the 
entities in the Crossref dump. All the entity types retrieved from Crossref were aligned to one of 
following five categories: journal, book, proceedings, dataset, other, as illustrated in (Heibi et al., 
2019). The outcomes are summarised in Figure 1, where it is evident that the number of open 
citations available in COCI is always greater than the number of closed citations to these entities 
to which COCI does not have access, for each of the publication categories considered, with the 
categories proceedings and dataset having the largest ratios. 
Analysis of the Crossref data show that there are in total ~4.1 million DOIs that have received no 
open citations and at least one closed citation.  Conversely, there are ~10.7 million DOIs that have 
received no closed citations and at least one open citation in COCI. Most of the papers in both these 
categories have received very few citations.   
The outcome of the second analysis (RQ2) shows which publishers are receiving the most open 
citations. To this end, we considered all the open citations recorded in COCI, and compared them 
with the number of closed citations to these same entities recorded in Crossref. Figure 2 shows the 
top  twenty  publishers  that  received  the  greatest  number  of  open  citations.  Elsevier  is  the  first 
publisher  according  to  this  ranking,  but  it  also  records  the  highest  number  of  closed  citations 
received (~97M vs. ~105.5M). The highest ratio in terms of open citations vs. closed citations was 
recorded  by  IEEE  publications  (ratio  6.25  to  1),  while  the  lowest  ratio  was  for  the  American 
Chemical Society (ratio 0.73 to 1).  

Figure 1. The number of open citations (available in COCI) vs. closed citations (according to 

Crossref data) of the cited entities within COCI, analyzed and grouped according to five distinct 

categories. [Note that the vertical axis has a logarithmic scale]. 

 

 

 
Figure 2. The top twenty publishers sorted in decreasing order according to the number of open 
citations the entities they published have received, according to the open citation data within COCI. 
We accompany this count with the number of closed citations to the entities published by each of 

them according to the values available in Crossref, the total numbers of citations to these 

publishers’ entities, and the percentages of these totals that are open or closed. 

 
Considering the twenty publishers listed in Figure 2, we wanted additionally to know their current 
support for the open citation movement (RQ3). The results of this analysis (made by querying the 
Crossref API on 24 January 2019) are shown in Figure 3. Among the top ten publishers shown in 
Figure  2,  i.e.  those  who  themselves  received  the  largest  numbers  of  open  citations,  only  five, 
namely Springer Nature, Wiley, the American Physical Society, Informa UK Limited, and Oxford 
University Press, are participating actively in the open publication of their own citations through 
Crossref. 
It is noteworthy that JSTOR contributes very few references to Crossref, while the many citations 
directed towards its own holdings place JSTOR twelfth in the list of publishers receiving open 
citations (Figure 2).  However, as the last column of Figure 3 shows, all the major publishers listed 
here are failing to submit reference lists to Crossref for a large number of the publications for which 
they submit metadata, that number being the difference between the value in the last column for 
that publisher and the combined values in the preceding three columns.  JSTOR is the worst in this 
regard,  submitting  references  with  only  0.53%  of  its  deposits  to  Crossref,  while  the  American 
Physical Society is the best, submitting references with 96.54% of its publications recorded in 
Crossref. 
Additional  information  about  these  analyses,  including  the  code  and  the  data  we  have  used  to 
compute all the figures, is available as a Jupyter notebook at https://github.com/sosgang/pushing-
open-citations-issi2019/blob/master/script/croci_nb.ipynb. 

 
Figure 3. The contributions to open citations made by the twenty publishers listed in Figure 2, as of 
24 January 2018, according to the data available through the Crossref API. The counts listed in this 

table refers to the number of publications for which each publisher has submitted metadata to 

Crossref that include the publication’s reference list. The categories closed, limited and open refer to 

publications for which the reference lists are not visible to anyone outside the Crossref Cited-by 
membership, are visible only to them and to Crossref Metadata Plus members, or are visible to all, 
respectively. Additional information on this classification of Crossref reference lists is available at 

https://www.crossref.org/reference-distribution/. The final column in the table shows the total 

number of publications for which the publisher has submitted metadata to Crossref, whether or not 

those metadata include the reference lists of those publications. 

 
It should be stressed that a very large number of potentially open citations are totally missing in 
the Crossref database, and consequently from COCI, for the simple reason that many publishers, 
particularly smaller ones with limited technical and financial resources, but also all the large ones 
shown in Figure 3 and most of the others, are simply not depositing with Crossref the reference 
lists for any or all of their publications. 

Discussion 
According  to  the  data  retrieved,  the  open  DOI-to-DOI  citations  available  in  COCI  exceed  the 
number of closed DOI-to-DOI citations recorded in Crossref for every publication category, as 
shown in Figure 1. The journal category is the one receiving the most open citations overall, as 
expected considering the historical and present importance of journals in most areas of the scholarly 
ecosystem. However, the number of closed citations to journal articles within Crossref is also of 
great significance, since these 322 million closed citations represent 43% of the total.   
It is important to note that about one third of these closed citations to journal articles (according to 
Figure 2) are references to entities published by Elsevier, and that references from within Elsevier’s 
own publications constitute the largest proportion of these closed citations, since Elsevier is the 
largest publisher of journal articles. Thus Elsevier’s present refusal to open its article references is 
contributing significantly to the invisibility of Elsevier’s own publications within the corpus of 
open citation data that is being increasingly used by the scholarly community for discovery, citation 
network visualization and bibliometric analysis. 
It is also worth mentioning the discrepancy between the citations available in COCI, which comes 
from the data contained in the open and limited Crossref datasets as of 3 October 2018, and those 
available  within  those  same  Crossref  datasets  as  of  24  January  2019.  The  most  significant 
difference  relates  to  IEEE.  While  the  citations  present  in  COCI  include  those  from  IEEE 
publications to other entities prior to November 2018 (since in October 2018 its article metadata 
with references were present within the Crossref limited dataset), in November 2019 this scholarly 
society decided to close the main part of its Crossref references, and thus from that moment they 
became unavailable to Crossref Metadata Plus members such as OpenCitations, as highlighted in 
Figure 3. Thus IEEE citations from articles whose metadata was submitted to Crossref after the 
date of this switch to closed will no longer be automatically ingested into COCI. 

To date, the majority of the citations present in Crossref that are not available in COCI comes from 
just three publishers: Elsevier, the American Chemical Society and University of Chicago Press 
(Figure 3). In fact, considering the average value of 18.6 DOI-to-DOI citation links for each citing 
entity – calculated by dividing the total number of citations in COCI by the number of citing entities 
in the same dataset – these three publishers are holding more than 214 million DOI-to-DOI citations 
that  could  potentially  be  opened.  (The  IEEE  citation  data  which  was  in  the  Crossref  ‘limited’ 
category as of October 2018 are actually included in COCI, although those from that organization’s 
more recent publications will no longer be, as mentioned above).  
We think it is deeply regrettable and almost incomprehensible that any professional organization, 
learned  society  or  university  press,  whose  primary  mission  is  to  serve  the  interests  of  the 
practitioners,  scholars  and  readers  it  represents,  should  choose  not  open  all  its  publications’ 
reference lists as a public good, whatever secondary added-value services it chooses to build on 
top of the citations that those reference lists contain.  

CROCI, the Crowdsourced Open Citations Index 
The results of the Initiative for Open Citations (I4OC) have been remarkable, since its efforts have 
led  to  the  liberation  of  millions  of  citations  in  a  relatively  short  time.   However,  many  more 
citations, the lifeblood of the scholarly communication, are still not available to the general public, 
as mentioned in the previous section. Some researchers and journal editors, in particular, have 
recently started to interact with publishers that are not participating in I4OC, in attempts to convince 
them  to  release  their  citation  data.  Remarkable  examples  of  these  activities  are  the  petition 
promoted  by  Egon  Willighagen  (https://tinyurl.com/acs-petition)  addressed  to  the  American 
Chemical Society, and the several unsuccessful requests made to Elsevier by the Editorial Board 
of the Journal of Informetrics, which eventually resulted in the resignation of the entire Editorial 
Board on 10 January 2019 in response to Elsevier’s refusal to address their issues (http://www.issi-
society.org/media/1380/resignation_final.pdf). 
To provide a pragmatic alternative that would permit the harvesting of currently closed citations, 
so that they could then be made available to the public, we at OpenCitations have created a new 
OpenCitations Index: CROCI, the Crowdsourced Open Citations Index, into which individuals 
identified by ORCiD identifiers may deposit citation information that they have a legal right to 
submit,  and  within  which  these  submitted  citation  data  will  be  published  under  a  CC0  public 
domain waiver to emphasize and ensure their openness for every kind of reuse without limitation. 
Since  citations  are  statements  of  fact  about  relationships  between  publications  (resembling 
statements of fact about marriages between individual persons), they are not subject to copyright, 
although their specific textual arrangements within the reference lists of particular publications 
may  be.   Thus  the  citations  from  which  the  reference  list  of  an  author’s  publication  has  been 
composed may legally be submitted to CROCI, although the formatted reference list cannot be. 
Similarly, citations extracted from within an individual’s electronic reference management system 
and presented in the requested format may be legally submitted to CROCI, irrespective of the 
original sources of these citations.  
To populate CROCI, we ask researchers, authors, editors and publishers to provide us with their 
citation data organised in a simple four-column CSV file (“citing_id”, “citing_publication_date”, 
“cited_id”,  “cited_publication_date”),  where  each  row  depicts  a  citation  from  the  citing  entity 
(“citing_id”,  giving 
the  cited  entity)  published  on  a  certain  date 
(“citing_publication_date”, with the date value expressed in ISO format “yyyy-mm-dd”), to the 
cited  entity  (“cited_id”,  giving   the  DOI  of  the  cited  entity)  published  on  a  certain  date 
(“cited_publication_date”, again with the date value expressed in ISO format “yyyy-mm-dd”).  The 
submitted dataset may contain an individual citation, groups of citations (for example those derived 
from the reference lists of one or more publications), or entire citation collections. Should any of 
the submitted citations be already present within CROCI, these duplicates will be automatically 
detected and ignored.  
The date information given for each citation should be as complete as possible, and minimally 
should be the publication years of the citing and cited entities. However, if such date information  is 

the  DOI  of 

a 

– 

of 

of 

be 

an 

be 

file 

can 

can 

such 

such 

CVS 

found 

found 

2017) 

format 

example 

example 

citations 

unavailable,  we  will  try  to  retrieve  it  automatically  using  OpenCitations  technology  already 
available.  DOIs  may  be  expressed  in  any  of  a  variety  of  valid  alternative  formats,  e.g. 
“https://doi.org/10.1038/502295a”, “http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/502295a”, “doi: 10.1038/502295a”, 
“doi:10.1038/502295a”, or simply “10.1038/502295a”. 
at 
An 
https://github.com/opencitations/croci/blob/master/example.csv. As an alternative to submissions 
in CSV format, contributors can submit the same citation data using the Scholix format (Burton et 
al., 
at 
https://github.com/opencitations/croci/blob/master/example.scholix.  
Submission of such a citation dataset in CSV or Scholix format should be made as a file upload 
either  to  Figshare  (https://figshare.com)  or  to  Zenodo  (https://zenodo.org).  For  provenance 
purposes, the ORCID personal identifier of the submitter of these citation data should be explicitly 
provided in the metadata or in the description of the Figshare/Zenodo object. Once such a citation 
data file upload has been made, the submitter should inform OpenCitations of this fact by adding 
an 
repository 
(https://github.com/opencitations/croci/issues).  
OpenCitations  will  then  process  each  submitted  citation  dataset  and  ingest  the  new  citation 
information into CROCI. CROCI citations will be available at http://opencitations.net/index/croci 
using  an  appropriate  REST  API  and  SPARQL  endpoint,  and  will  additionally  be  published  as 
periodic data dumps in Figshare, all releases being under CC0 waivers. We propose in future to 
enable combined searches over all the OpenCitations indexes, including COCI and CROCI. 
We are confident that the community will respond positively to this proposal of a simple method 
by which the number of open citations available to the academic community can be increased, in 
particular since the data files to be uploaded have a very simple structure and thus should be easy 
to prepare. In particular, we hope for submissions of citations from within the reference lists of 
authors’  green  OA  versions  of  papers  published  by  Elsevier,  IEEE,  ACS  and  UCP,  and  from 
publishers not already submitting publication metadata to Crossref, so as to address existing gaps 
in open citations availability. We look forward to your active engagement in this initiative to further 
increase the availability of open scholarly citations. 

the  CROCI 

the  GitHub 

tracker 

issue 

issue 

new 

of 

to 

References 
Burton, A., Fenner, M., Haak, W. & Manghi, P. (2017). Scholix Metadata Schema for Exchange of 

Scholarly Communication Links (Version v3). Zenodo. DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.1120265    

Heibi, I., Peroni, S. & Shotton, D. (2019). Types, open citations, closed citations, publishers, and 
participation reports of Crossref entities. Version 1. Zenodo. DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.2558257    

OpenCitations (2018). COCI CSV dataset of all the citation data. Version 3. Figshare. DOI: 

10.6084/m9.figshare.6741422.v3   

Peroni, S., Dutton, A., Gray, T. & Shotton, D. (2015). Setting our bibliographic references free: towards 

open citation data. Journal of Documentation, 71: 253-277. DOI: 10.1108/JD-12-2013-0166  

Peroni, S. & Shotton, D. (2018). Open Citation: Definition. Version 1. Figshare. DOI: 

Schiermeier, Q. (2017). Initiative aims to break science's citation paywall. Nature News. DOI: 

10.6084/m9.figshare.6683855    

10.1038/nature.2017.21800    

00104-7  

Shotton, D. (2013). Open citations. Nature, 502: 295-297. DOI: 10.1038/502295a  
Shotton, D. (2018). Funders should mandate open citations. Nature, 553: 129. DOI: 10.1038/d41586-018-

Sugimoto, C. R., Waltman, L., Larivière, V., van Eck, N. J., Boyack, K. W., Wouters, P. & de Rijcke, S. 

(2017). Open citations: A letter from the scientometric community to scholarly publishers. ISSI. 
http://www.issi-society.org/open-citations-letter/ (last visited 26 January 2018) 

van Eck, N.J. & Waltman, L. (2010). Software survey: VOSviewer, a computer program for bibliometric 

mapping. Scientometrics, 84(2): 523-538. DOI: 10.1007/s11192-009-0146-3    

van Eck, N.J., Waltman, L., Larivière, V. & Sugimoto, C. R. (2018). Crossref as a new source of citation 

data: A comparison with Web of Science and Scopus. CWTS Blog. 
https://www.cwts.nl/blog?article=n-r2s234 (last visited 26 January 2018) 

