







The criminal upperworld and the emergence of a disciplinary code in the
early chartered accountancy profession



Abstract
The paper analyses the circumstances which resulted in theformulation of a disciplinary code by the Society of Accountants in Edinburgh (SAE) during the 1880s. The episode is related through historical biographies of two villainous practitioners: Henry Callender and Donald Smith Peddie. The absence of codified regulations pertaining to professional conduct in the early constitution of the SAE is explored in the context of prevailing vocational ideologies and the role of admission stipulations as socio cultural filtering devices. It is revealed that organisational responses to cases of criminal misconduct were positively correlated with the degree of "offence visibility" and the resultant level of adverse publicity. The protective and status-preserving motives for the framing of disciplinary rules by professional associations are also highlighted. The study emphasises the potential impact of the disreputable practition er on the construction and destruction of the institutions of professionalism.

Keywords: Accountancy profession; history; Britain, crime; discipline; ethics.

























 






Although most Chartered Accountants naturally conform to those unwritten laws which must of necessity govern the conduct of any body of professional men associated together for their mutual good, yet cases sometimes arise that render it a matter for regret that there exists among accountants no admitted code of etiquette (The Accountant, 21.7.1894, pp.  637-8).

Introduction

Biographical studies have long been conducted by accounting historians due to their potential for revealing the "influence of key individuals on accounting concepts, practice, and institutions" (Previts et al., 1990, p.142). Recently, students of accounting professionalism, conscious of the exhortations of post-revisionist sociologists to investigate the "massive historical variation" in occupational experiences (Collins, 1990, p.21), have focussed on the meso-level analysis of specific professional groups and the micro-centred study of pivotal figures in the construction and implementation of institutional strategies. In particular, Lee has urged the investigation of how professionalisation "is operationalised by a relatively few key individuals in positions of power and responsibility" (I996, p.x). Such biographical studies inevitably concentrate on luminaries and the role of the vocational elite in the emergence and protection of organisational structures. This paper analyses the impact of a small minority of practitioners who comprised an internal menace to the association - members who resorted to crime and misconduct.
Key actors are made audible and visible to historians through oral tradition and by the institutional and documentary legacies which testify to their positive achievements. By contrast, the focus here is on those individuals whose notorious and pernicious activities tarnished collective claims to professional status and thus ensured that they were considered best hidden from history . Yet, as will be shown, miscreant professionals also impacted on institutional configurations because their destructive behaviour could elicit organisational responses for the fortification or restoration of vocational standing. Historical biographies of the disreputable accountant may also provide insights into the motives, values and perceptions of a wider occupational populace and also reveal how contemporary social phenomena coloured the behaviour of the individual (Briggs, 1954). Analyses of the felonious practitioner may be particularly illuminative of the vocational attitudes and ideologies which prevailed in the early accountancy profession . The complexion of public responses to "scandals" in the profession also assist attempts to locate the occupation in the contemporary social structure.
As an investigation into villainous members of the nascent accountancy profession the paper also seeks to extend the historical study of criminal behaviour among those who occupied middle and upper class statuses in advanced capitalism (Jenkins,  1987; Robb,  1992). The analysis of such "upperworld" 1 crime contrasts




with the more prevalent studies of "underworld" criminality among the labouring masses (for example, Chesney, 1970; Emsley, 1987; Gattrell et al., 1987; Jones, 1982; Philips, 1977; Weiner, 1990). As Robb has shown, the increasing complexity of finance and corporate structures in the maturing industrial economy offered substantial opportunities for the perpetration of white-collar crime (1992, pp.6-7). Despite its contemporary significance and deleterious consequences for large numbers of investors, depositors and employees, the criminal upperworld of the nineteenth century has, until recently, received scant attention (ibid.). Given the occupational proximity of accountants to the commercial, industrial and financial communities, and the likely permeation of its ideals and standards of conduct to the business domain (ibid., pp.177-8), the historical interfaces between white-collar crime and the accountancy profession are especially deserving of greater attention. Recent historical investigations of professional conduct, ethics and discipline,
such as those of Parker  on Australia  (1987,  1994) and Preston  et al. on the    US ( 1995), bear directly on the study of professional misdeeds and immorality reported in this paper. Parker's "private interest model of professional accounting ethics" provides a useful conceptual frame in which to consider organisational responses to revelations concerning the malfeasance of practitioners (1994, pp.510-16). The centrality of the insulation function of codes of conduct, the symbolic role of disciplinary processes and the importance of "offence visibility" provide useful tools to understanding the emergence of rules for the expulsion of criminal chartered accountants which are discussed here. The investigation by Preston et al. into the content of ethical codes during the twentieth century is pertinent in its revelations about how perceptions of what constitutes "professional" conduct are dynamic and reflect changing cultural contexts (ibid., p.509).
This paper examines the interfaces between contemporary culture and professional (mis)behaviour in a different time and locale. The study differs from other recent work in that it applies depth biographical analysis to offending professionals rather than focussing on the changing content of formalised statements of conduct or the derivation of a model of professional ethics based on the scrutiny of numerous disciplinary cases. By examining the origins and activities of the few members of the Society of Accountants in Edinburgh (SAE) who were deemed guilty of criminal misconduct from its formation in 1853 to the end of the nineteenth century, insights are gained into perceptions of vocational behaviour during the infancy of modern organised accountancy in the context of a small, localised, and highly status-conscious professional community. The nature and extent of organisational responses to each case of wrongdoing also illuminate the character of accounting institutions during the second half of the nineteenth century and contemporary perceptions of professional morality.




10

 
 






Impediments to professional misconduct In Victorian Britain

In order to fully comprehend the several facets of accounting professionalism which are revealed in the stories of criminal behaviour discussed later in the paper, an analysis of prevailing attitudes towards professional misconduct is necessary.
Misconduct andthe professionalIdeal
The royal charter of incorporation which was granted to the SAE in 1854 contained no references to the institution of disciplinary powers or procedures. In 1855 the Society issued its "constitution and laws". The closest which this document came to referring to the chastisement of disreputable members was the empowerment of the Council to consider and advise "on all matters" affecting the interests of the Society (Walker, 1988, p.313). In fact, the SAE did not formulate a disciplinary code until 1883-4 in the wake of events which are related in the second part of the paper.
Given that the principal organisational model emulated by the public accountants in Edinburgh was the local legal profession, the absence from the early SAE rule book of any codified provisions relating to misconduct, is perhaps, surprising. The long-established institutions which represented and governed the profession of law in Edinburgh had introduced formalised disciplinary procedures well before the 1850s. Judges were vested with the power to reprimand, suspend or depose members of the Faculty of Advocates (the Scottish equivalent of barristers) (Index Jurid icus, 1852, p.145). The original regulations of the Society of Solicitors to the Supreme Courts in 1784 provided for the punishment of members who were deemed guilty or accused of malversation , dishonesty or breach of trust (Barclay, 1984, p.295). By the mid-nineteenth century the Council of the Society of Solicitors to the Supreme Courts was charged with the responsibility of adjudicating those instances of conduct by members "which may be considered derogatory to the Profession" (Bye-Laws and Regulations, 1851, p.3). Similarly, the rules of the more senior Society of Writers to Her Majesty's Signet provided for the appointment of Commissioners from among the members whose task was to consider cases of misconduct. As guardians of the profession, the Commissioners were given authority to inflict punishments on "delinquent" solicitors "for the good of the calling" (Acts and Regulations, 18ll, appendix; Index Juridicus, 1852, p.63).
It is possible that the nascent SAE desisted from following the lawyer examples because the codification of disciplinary processes might have suggested (to a public suspicious of prevailing standards of business morality) that members of the new professional organisation were capable of unbecoming behaviour. However, the absence of provisions relating to conduct and discipline must also be considered in the context of prevailing professional ideologies. The latter also provide an essential backcloth to understanding contemporary responses to cases of professional crime and misconduct.
11

 
 
1-H+i'lribfijHlstory  NS Vol 1, No 2 - 1996


Preston et al. have illustrated how attitudes towards vocational conduct in the American accountancy profession during the early twentieth century reflected contemporary cultural values. Protestantism, "character" and idealism ensured that the occupational association relied on the admission of men of moral integrity; their practice of altruism, adherence to a "social ethic" and loyalty to fellow professionals in order to discourage misconduct (1995, pp.514-22). Hence, "The accountant's calling was governed not merely by written rules and regulation, but also by a belief in divine law and continuous examination by himself and his brethren" (ibid., p.522). A similar attitude prevailed in Britain during the nineteenth century.
Although some of the "new" professions in Victorian Britain sought to enhance occupational claims by instituting regulations pertaining to the conduct of members (Corfield, 1995, p.204), the contemporary professional ideal emphasised the adherence by the individual practitioner to the "spirit" or conventions of professional "etiquette" as opposed to the formulation of codified rules of conduct and discipline (Reader, 1966, pp.158-63). Compliance with acceptable patterns of professional behaviour was a matter of mutuality and loyalty to the association (Duman, 1979, p.118). The "pressure of opinion" exerted by professional brethren was often preferred to, or considered more effective than, the deterrent effects of disciplinary committees (Carr-Saunders & Wilson, 1933, p.420; Robb, 1992, p.177). Nineteenth century concepts of professionalism stressed the probity, dignity, honour and gentlemanly instincts of the practitioner. His self-definition and personal enforcement of the standards of propriety, "civic morality" and altruism commensurate with his status were considered to be the primary safeguards against unworthy conduct.
The contemporary aversion to the codification of standards of conduct and the emphasis on social and moral controls to regulate vocational behaviour received expression in the accountancy press during the later nineteenth century. The accountant's adherence to conventional morality was considered essential to the maintenance of his professional demeanour. Good conduct would "not be attained so much by regulation and bye-laws, as by the moral influence which members of a chartered body will gradually exercise amongst themselves" (Accountant, 5.6.1880, p.4). At a general meeting of the newly formed Institute of Accountants in London in April 1871 the President, William Quilter, revealed the centrality of high morals to the standing of the public accountant:
... something beyond mere professional knowledge and capability must be brought into the field of professional action, if the accountant is to maintain and consolidate the important position which of late years he has come to occupy in relation to the legal and mercantile community. By that something more, I mean the qualities of unswerving rectitude - fearless independence - and single mindedness in the conduct of the business entrusted to him ... the due execution of which would be impossible in the absence of the moral  qualities

12

 
 






I have indicated . Without them, a man may be a clever accountant, but he will do nothing either to elevate his own individual status, or that of the profession to which he belongs (MS28/404/I, pp.8-9).
The institution by British accountancy organisations of codified disciplinary rules to deal with cases of blatant or criminal misconduct was also deemed inappropriate during the nineteenth century because "as a rule, conduct of this nature is either amenable to the law, which acts as an effectual deterrent, or it is so morally reprehensible that a man may be trusted to abstain from it simply from regard to his own interests" (Accountant, 22.3.1879, p.3).
It was in the context described above that previous to the 1880s, the rules of the SAE contained no provision for instigating the expulsion of a member (Walker, 1988, pp.305- 17). The name of a CA who persistently defaulted in the payment of subscriptions or failed to comply with the regulations of the Society, was simply and quietly erased from the roll of members. Those rare instances of complaint about the conduct of a CA (usually concerning the distribution of circulars to solicit business), 2 resulted in a discussion by the Council and a letter from the Secretary informing the member that such behaviour was in breach of the "usual professional etiquette" (Sederunt Book, 2/1, p.271; also Kedslie, 1990, p.272). A similar approach was adopted by the neighbouring Institute of Accountants and Actuaries in Glasgow. The official history of The Institute of Chartered Accountants of Scotland relates how:
... the Council of the Glasgow Institute, because of one or two cases which had been brought before the Professional Etiquette Committee, found it necessary in their report for 1908 to call attention to a Minute of Council dated January 30, 1865, bearing upon the question of canvassing for business, and to impress on members the extreme desirability of maintaining a high standard of professional etiquette in all their business relations with one another and with the public (A History of the Chartered Accountants of Scotland, 1954, p.54, italics added).

Socio-cultural filtering.Closure devices as social and moral controls
Despite the absence of written rules relating to the misconduct and discipline of its members, the SAE was not devoid of mechanisms to prevent the tarnishing of its organisational status through the dishonourable behaviour of a CA. Admission regulations were configured not only to restrict entry to those individuals who were deemed unlikely to bring the occupation into disrepute but also to encourage the internalisation of accepted norms of professional conduct.
Preston et al. have shown that during the early twentieth century, the reliance
by the American accountancy profession on the integrity of the individual professional ensured that the organisation "need not be fully responsible for the moral development of its membership, rather it need only admit and retain those persons exhibiting  'proper' character" (1995, p.521). This was also the case in the


13

 
 
t'iiUJ'fr j@Hlstory   


accountancy profession in Victorian Britain, particularly the SAE. As claims to the credibility and probity of the practitioner rested on membership of the professional organisation, the emphasis was placed by the association on the imposition of admission stipulations which would prevent the intrusion of those considered capable of malfeasance. Conditions of entry, qualification procedures and certification ensured that only those deemed competent and reputable were allowed through to offer services to the public.
In England and Wales, for example, the newly constituted Institute of Chartered Accountants (ICAEW) stressed its implementation of examinations and four "fundamental rules" to prevent the admission of "non public accountants" who were considered least likely (due to the nature of their business engagements) to conduct themselves in a "professional" manner. In particular, the royal charter of 1880 empowered the ICAEW to "lay down such rules respecting admission to membership and exclusion therefrom as would prevent Public Accoun.tants from mixing the pursuit of any other business with the discharge of the higher duties devolving on them as Public Accountants" (Accountant, 12.6.1880, p.5, italics added; Millerson, 1964, p.163; Parker, 1986, pp. 57-9). The status implications which could arise from the combined practice of "professional" public accountancy and "commercial" broking (the latter activity not being constrained by the conventions of professional morality) is ably illustrated in Shackleton and Milner's analysis of a mixed accountancy practice in Glasgow during the late nineteenth century (1996, pp.  116-25; Accountant,  23.4.1892, pp. 329-30).3
From the outset, membership of the SAE had been confined to the community of competent and respectable accountants (Index Juridicus, 1853, pp.x-xii; Sederunt Book, 2/1, p.5; Walker, 1995). At the end of the nineteenth century, despite the advance of the examination, senior office bearers continued to maintain that admission was restricted to "gentlemen of professional standing" (Sederunt Book, 2/2, p.161) and that the Society was exclusive "as regards culture and conduct" (quoted in Walker, 1988, p.xi). In 1892 the President of the SAE asserted that:
We are willing according to our rules to admit any person into our Society of good character, who complies with the course of training and the requirements and qualification of the Society. We do not exclude persons otherwise, who satisfy what we regard as essential to the proper practice of the business (ibid., italics added).
The ability of a potential member to pay substantial apprenticeship and entrance fees was also perceived as evidence of vocational commitment, pecuniary independence and gentility (ibid., pp.129-31 & 190-3; Shackleton, 1995, p.32). In this respect, the SAE was highly emulative of the local legal profession. During the 1850s admission to the Society of Solicitors to the Supreme Court was dependent on  the  candidate  being  "of  good  moral  character"  (Bye-laws  and Regulations,



 
 





1851, p.3). Similarly, entrants to the Society of Writers to Her Majesty's Signet were expected to be "of good fame and reputation" (Acts and Regulations, 1811, p.8). As Duman has observed, although the recruitment of professionals was increasingly founded on meritocratic criteria in late Victorian Britain, the primary aim of selecting only those of good character "seems to have remained constant" (1979, p.123).
Other conditions of admission to the SAE obstructed the entry of the individual considered likely to bring the vocation into disrepute. New members could only be admitted at annual meetings (where they would be visible to established professionals) and, in the early years of the Society's existence, only following formal nomination, seconding and on the approval of 75% of those present. Membership was also restricted to those who intended to practice their vocation within the relatively close spatial confines of Edinburgh . In 1882, the year of the formative case of misconduct discussed here, there were only 164 members of the SAE. Covert behaviour was difficult given the close social and occupational networks in the local professional community which encouraged mutualism and fraternity (Walker, 1993, p.133). The apprenticeship system was particularly important in fostering close connections and loyalties between practitioners. It comprised a medium for occupational socialisation and the inculcation of a professional ethos. Self-recruitment (particularly in the larger CA firms) was also a deterrent to unacceptable behaviour (Walker, 1988, pp.240-5). The good conduct of a CA father, son, brother, uncle or nephew was a familial as well as a professional obligation as the status ramifications of disgrace in such cases were not confined to the individual.
Further, from 1860 until 1875 (when it was discovered that the Society had no power to act in the event of a contravention) (Minute Book, 3/1, p.42), the potential entrant to the SAE was obliged to sign a declaration that "his exclusive object in Business is to follow the profession of an Accountant as defined in the Society's Charter" ( ibid., p.59). This condition of membership ensured that the CA was restricted to contemporary prescriptions of "professional" practice and was informally constrained by the standards of conduct associated with that status. The SAE member was thereby distinguished from the non-credentialed and potentially unscrupulous "accountant" who owed allegiance to no professional organisation.
The three organisations of chartered accountants in Scotland have been compared with the Inns of Court of English barristers (Carr-Saunders & Wilson, 1933, p.210). In relation to their respective modes of regulating professional conduct during the nineteenth century the analogy is not wholly inappropriate . Although the "benchers" of the Inns could wield disciplinary powers, as with the wider legal profession these were seldom invoked or were largely ineffective (Abel, 1988, pp.133 & 248-9; Duman, 1983, p.37; Lewis, 1982, pp.41-2). More effectual was the informal discipline and social control nurtured by the esprit de corps of    a


15

 
 
C'ii+m:i@Hlstoty   NS Vol 1,No 2  1996


group of learned professionals who resided in close proximity to one another (predominantly in London). This ensured that "every barrister was the watchful guardian of the honour and integrity of his learned brethren" (quoted in Duman, 1983, p.37).
The SAE's apparent emphasis on the prevention of, rather than reaction to, cases of misconduct through: admission procedures, spatial and jurisdictional restrictions on practice, professional socialisation, the visibility of individuals in a small occupational populace, reliance on the public practitioner's compliance with the law, and adherence to contemporary standards of etiquette and personal morality, proved extremely effective in minimising internal threats to the status of the professional populace. In 1900 the SAE boasted a membership of 351. Since its inauguration in 1853 the society had admitted over 450 individuals to its ranks. Of this number only two CAs were removed from membership for committing crime and professional misconduct. These individuals led undistinguished careers as sole practitioners, were largely secluded from the gaze of their fellow chartered accountants and were therefore less restrained by the socio-cultural impediments to dishonourable conduct.4 The relevant cases were those of Henry Callender, and, more importantly, Donald Smith Peddie. Both were signatories to the SAE's application for a royal charter in 1854. Hitherto the cessation of membership of Callender  and  Peddie  has been  either unaccounted  for (Brown,  1905, pp.364 &
376) or hidden behind speculative and innocuous explanations pertaining to subscription arrears or retirement  (Stewart, 1986, pp.58 &  139).

The public and private worlds of two Victorian chartered accountants

Domesticity was one of the most potent ideals in Victorian society (Davidoff & Hall, 1987, pp.180-92). The private world of home was rigidly separated from the public province of work (Thompson, 1988, p.197). This uncoupling of domains has ensured that identifying covert social relationships during the nineteenth century is often problematic due to their being "veiled behind the Victorian culture of privacy and reticence" (Harris, 1994, p.89). However, when accepted norms of behaviour were breached, resulting in the interposition of the legislature, the courts and the media, the circumstances attending violations of the law and contemporary moral standards were often subject to sensationalised disclosure. In this way, the details of a miscreant private life could periodically and legitimately enter the realm of the public. It is through such exposure that there exists evidence of the villainous activities of Henry Callender and Donald Smith Peddie.
Henry Callender, CA
The first case of the SAE Council removing one of its number from the list of members for reasons other than arrears of subscriptions occurred in 1873. The case arose purely as a result of unfavourable  reports in the press. The wrong-doer  was


 
 






expeditiously dispatched without any investigation into the credence of the revelations contained in the printed media.
The offender, Henry Callender, was an original member of the SAE (Stewart, 1986, p.58). He was outwardly respectable and established as a public accountant. Callender was educated at Edinburgh University and his father had been an accountant in Edinburgh (Matriculation Registers, 1823-35). Callender commenced in public practice about 1838 at the age of 29 and was subsequently Manager of the Scottish Life Assurance and Guarantee Association and of the Professional Life Assurance Company ( Edinburgh and Leith Post Office Directory ). Callender became an associate member of the Institute of Actuaries, was a director of the Scottish Imperial Insurance Company and was also one time Treasurer of the City of Edinburgh.
Callender's downfall concerned a municipal-related appointment. On 11 January 1873 The Scotsman reported that a meeting of The Water of Leith Sewerage Commissioners had been convened to consider "the state in which the books have been left by the late treasurer, Mr Henry Callender, who some time ago disappeared  from Edinburgh"  (11.1.1873, p.4). Defalcations  were  estimated   at
2,600 and it was envisaged that further investigation would unearth more substantial frauds on the Commission. The press report concluded that the matter had "been placed in the hands of the Procurator-Fiscal" and that Callender appeared to have absconded to the United States (ibid.).
The publicised revelation of alleged criminality by one of its members induced a swift response by the Council of the SAE. Two days after the press report a meeting of the Council was convened where it was resolved that: "as appeared from public newspapers, Mr. Callender had left the country for America under heavy charges, they instructed the Secretary to delete his name from the List of Members of the Society when the same is printed" (Sederunt Book, 2/1, p.200). As there was no specific constitutional procedure for dealing with such matters, this executive decision was not brought before the membership of the SAE and no alteration to the bye-laws of the Society resulted from the case.
Compared to the Callender episode, the only other recorded instance of criminal misconduct by a member of the SAE during the nineteenth century generated a deluge of adverse publicity . As a result it elicited a greater and more enduring response from the professional organisation.
Donald Smith Peddle, CA
Outwardly, Donald Smith Peddie was an archetypal original member of the SAE. He possessed several attributes which stamped him as an estimable professional accountant of reputable origin. Peddie was a grandson of a Lord Provost of Edinburgh and was the second son of the Reverend Dr James Peddie (Brown, 1905, p.376; Stewart, 1986, p.139). In addition to being a Moderator of the Synod


17

 
 
l'iiU\'frlfflH1story   NS Vol 1, No 2 - 1996


of the United Presbyterian Church and an active participant in "the benevolent and religious societies of Edinburgh" (Kay, 1877, Vol.4, p.351), the Reverend Peddie was a prolific author and noted philanthropist (Dictionary of National Biography, Vol.XV, pp.648-9). As a result of his "unblemished and useful life" he "enjoyed the esteem and reverence of all classes and all denominations of his fellow citizens" (Kay, 1877, Vol.4, p.353).
Donald Smith Peddie's elder brother, James, was a Writer to the Signet (the most eminent branch of the solicitor profession in Scotland) ( The Society of Writers to His Majesty' s Signet, 1936, p.286). James Peddie's son, John Dick Peddie, was a classical architect of considerable repute and the Liberal MP for Kilmarnock at the time when his uncle's misdemeanours came to light (Stenton & Lees, 1978, Vol.2, p.282). Peddie's younger brother, Reverend Dr William Peddie, succeeded his father as Minister of the Associate Burgher Congregation in Edinburgh (Small, 1904, pp.431-3). Donald Smith Peddie's credentials as an educated professional gentleman were enhanced by his having studied literature and law for six years at Edinburgh University  (Matriculation Registers,  1821-8).
Peddie commenced practice as an accountant in 1831 at the age of 23 (Edinburgh and Leith Post Office Directories ). Following a short period in the office of his lawyer brother, he spent the remainder of his relatively undistinguished career as a sole practitioner. Peddie was also the accountant and agent for the Edinburgh office of the Yorkshire Fire and Life Insurance  Company ( Oliver and Boyd's, Insurance Advertisements ) and received several appointments under judicial factories and trusts (CS). From 1833 he assisted his ageing father in the treasuryship of the Friendly Society of Dissenting Ministers in Scotland. This organisation was established in 1797 to provide for the widows and orphans of (mainly United Presbyterian) clergymen (Jeffrey, 1919) and its Treasurer earned an annual salary of 45 (CH3/5 l 6/8). Peddie augmented his limited practice income by rentals from a residential property in Edinburgh and also secured returns on an investment as a partner in a colliery company in Fife (CS318/30/239, Inventory). He was also the trustee of mineral workings near Dunfermline which he let to a coalmaster (Scotsman, 2.12.1882, p.6). Despite the variety of his interests, Peddie's pecuniary status was seldom stable. The cash books of the SAE reveal that during the late 1850s Peddie was in arrears with his subscriptions. In January 1864, the Commercial Bank of Scotland demanded that his cash credit of 1,500 be paid up due to its foundation on unsatisfactory security (Commercial Bank Minute Book, Vol.7, pp.220, 261, 267).
Having been invited to join the newly formed Institute of Accountants in Edinburgh in January 1853 (Sederunt Book, 2/1, p.5), Peddie actively participated in the affairs of his professional organisation. He regularly attended annual meetings and from 1872 to 1876 sat as a member of the Council (ibid., p.196). Ironically, he was present at the meeting which removed Henry Callender from the



 
 






list of members in 1873. It was only in the twilight of his career that Donald Smith Peddie was to gain notoriety. In order to comprehend the manner of his downfall and the SAE's reaction to it, it is essential to understand Peddie's relationship with a Mr and Mrs William Cornelius and the lurid disclosures which it precipitated.
An uncommon business relationship
William Cornelius was born in Hanover, Germany in 1830 (Census Returns, 1871, 685/2/46). He trained as an artist at the Royal Academy in Munich and sometime thereafter removed to London and became a British subject. In 1863 he married Elizabeth Brown, a professional musician. Six years later Cornelius moved to Edinburgh and started a small business as a decorative artist to the local nobility and gentry (CS243/1255, Condescendence; Edinburgh and Leith Post Office Directory, 1870-1). Cornelius's association with Peddie commenced when he rented a tenement flat from Peddie who was acting factor of the property which was owned by the Friendly Society of Dissenting Ministers . (CS243/1255, Condescendence; CH3/516/10, p.15). It was possibly due to his being in arrears for 18 months rent that Peddie employed Cornelius to undertake some house painting. Cornelius's business venture proved unsuccessful and in August 1870 he was bankrupted  with realisable assets of 100 and liabilities of 370 (CS3l 8/l5/73).
Following his discharge as a bankrupt in November 1870, Cornelius, with the assistance of Peddie, commenced a new house painting business from a more central location in Edinburgh (CS247/4875, Condescendence). As Cornelius had no capital it was verbally agreed that Peddie would, for a time, "supply all moneys requisite for carrying on the extended business", direct the firm and also meet the expenses of the Cornelius household (ibid.). For his part, Cornelius would remit all the income from the venture to Peddie. Under this arrangement Peddie claimed to have advanced 10,000 to Cornelius between 1871 and 1878 (CS243/1255/4 , Proof).
In addition to his painting business Cornelius became increasingly involved in property speculation . He raised funds from Peddie and the Scottish Investment Company to acquire 28 tenement flats in Edinburgh. He also bought a residential property on the outskirts of the city and embarked on the construction of two suburban villas (CS243/1255/4, Proof). The completion of the latter required several injections of new capital. Between 1878 and 1881 Peddie supplied Cornelius with a total of 9,500 on the premise that "I felt myself bound to carry on to a certain extent, for the sake of recouping myself ' even though he claimed to have lost hope of recovering the whole of his investment (ibid.). From August 1877 advances totalling 1,800 were also secured from J. & W.C. Murray, Writers to the Signet. This law firm granted loans to Cornelius on the basis of his appearance as "a prosperous and well-to-do man" (ibid.).



19

 
 
l'iiCtl'hi@Htstory   NS Vol1,No 2 -1996


Additional short tenn credit was extended to Cornelius by J. & W.C Murray in order to provide working capital for his increasingly unprofitable painting business and to alleviate his mounting personal debts. In December 1879 Cornelius's problems were compounded by his losing a legal dispute with a finn of joiners (ibid.). By that time both he and Peddie had exhausted their meagre incomes and became involved in a "continual solicitation" of J. and W.C. Murray for more credit (ibid.). Inthe early 1880s Peddie "was in a perfectly impecunious state" and begged daily for money to meet his personal liabilities  (ibid.).
As Peddie became increasingly unable to sink further funds into Cornelius's projects, the hitherto close personal and business relations between the two men fractured. In a series of letters written to Peddie in 1881, Cornelius accused his associate of breaching their business arrangement, of refusing to pay creditors and of attempting to cause his bankruptcy (CS243/1255/3, 10.1.1881). In 1881 Cornelius complained that his decade-long acquaintance with Peddie had brought nothing but debt. He wrote:
... as often before I even had not a shilling to take home to keep house with, the consequence is, debts are incurred, & I am continuously worried by numerous Tradesmen, for payment. I asked you sometime ago, to be so good and give me your acceptance for a paultry sum of two hundred pounds, to meet this drain on me, but even that you have not done as yet, it is impossible for things to go on much longer this way, something has to be done, and shall be done. I can not wear the fool's cap any longer (ibid., 22.4.1881 ;21.1.1881).
From the autumn of 1881 Cornelius had greater cause to feel embittered. In November of that year J. & W.C. Murray issued a summons against Cornelius and Peddie for the recovery of 4,621 in advances and unpaid legal fees. Because most of the loans had been granted without guarantee or written agreement, the issue arose as to whether Cornelius (the principal) or Peddie (his agent), was responsible for making the repayments (CS243/1255/4 , Proof). Despite a tacit admission of responsibility by Peddie, on 7th July 1882, the court  detennined  that Cornelius was primarily  liable for the amount sued for (Scotsman, 8.7.1882, p.5).
In May 1882 Peddie also raised a separate action in which he sought the recovery of 19,487 from Cornelius. This amount represented advances made from 1870 to 1881 (CS247/4875, Summons and Condescendence). Peddie claimed that unbeknown to himself, Cornelius had applied the funds to property speculation and that this was in breach of their mutual agreement to finance the extended house decorating business. In July 1882, being unable to comply with the pecuniary consequences of the court' s decision in J. & W.C. Murray v. Cornelius and Peddie, and with judicial progression of the litigation instigated by Peddie imminent, Cornelius adopted an alternative strategy to improve his financial status and seek retribution from his former business associate.



20

 
 






Sexual  immorality and  the price  of professional  respectability
On the day of the judgment in J. & W.C. Murray v. Cornelius and Peddie, Elizabeth Cornelius left her husband's abode. One week later, Cornelius issued a summons against his wife and Peddie in an action for divorce. He alleged that Peddie and Elizabeth had committed adultery and sought 10,000 damages from the CA in compensation for the ruination of his "peace and domestic happiness" (CS243/1255, Condescendence). Cornelius alleged that from 1871 to 1878 Peddie (who was unmarried and then in his mid-sixties) had sexual intercourse with his wife in Peddie's office, the Cornelius residence and various other locations (ibid.). Cornelius claimed that in December 1878 he had discovered intimate correspondence written by Peddie to Elizabeth. In response, Cornelius composed the following letter to his wife's  lover:
My long felt suspicions are then now at last realised into Truth, the enclosed is a Copy of one of your corruptious letters written by you to my wife, I might have sent you a Copy of an other one, but they are all so filthy, so much so that I do not  like to soil my hands  with them. These are the deeds committed     by
D.S. Peddie, Esq., my particular friend, [who) has gone every Sunday to Church, I say read this letter you fearful monster, you came as a Wolf in Lam Clothing to my house, why could you not leave me alone. Satan look at your destruction, what have you made of my poor Wife: a hur, a hur corrupted with your filthiness, poor soul. God have mercy on her and forgive her. do now what you like, you have done your utmost. if the Law of this Country would permit me I should know how to deal with you, give me satisfaction and do not tum a coward in the bargain . I am entitled to revenge, and will have it ... I shall have some ofthis letter printed in large type and post them up on walls, yes even on the pulpit of your Church [sic]  (CS243/1255/3).
On receiving this letter, Peddie sent his lawyer to Cornelius in order to protest that no impropriety had taken place. Cornelius claimed to have been placated until 1881 when he resurrected claims that Peddie had caused him "the greatest injury possible" (CS243/1255, Condescendence) by seducing his wife and once more threatened retribution by revealing Peddie in his "true colours before the publick" (CS243/1255/3, 10.1.1881). In January 1881 he wrote to Peddie: "I can assure you, you never made a greater mistake in your life if you think you have fairly saddled me with your prostitute" (ibid.). As their business relationship became increasingly acrimonious, Cornelius demanded that Peddie forward 601 to cover business and household expenses inclusive of 150 for "twelve months keep of your fancy woman" (ibid., 18.8.1881).
In their written response to the summons for divorce, Peddie and Elizabeth Cornelius offered an alternative description of events. Mrs Cornelius denied adultery and contested that her husband had deliberately attempted to prostitute her and desired that she develop a sexual relationship with Peddie in order to extort money.   Elizabeth   Cornelius  claimed   that  on  the  basis   of   threats   of public


21

 
 
f'iiUJ'lll@Hlstory NS Vol 1, No 2  1996


allegations of adultery, Cornelius had extracted 20,000 from Peddie and the current claim for damages comprised another attempt to fleece her co-defender (CS243/1255, Condescendence). Peddie concurred that Cornelius had "tried every means in his power" to encourage illicit liaisons between himself and Elizabeth Cornelius for the purpose of blackmail (ibid.). By contrast, Cornelius argued that his demands for money from Peddie were related to their unwritten business arrangement.
The Cornelius divorce case opened at the Court of Session (the highest civil court in Scotland) in early November 1882 (CS243/1255/l). As with the other litigation in which Peddie was embroiled in 1882, the proceedings were reported in the Scottish press. The prevailing anti-sensualism of Victorian Britain (Mason, 1995) and the increasing publicity which attended divorce cases in the wake of matrimonial legislation in 1857, gave an added piquancy to the revelations of marital infidelity which emerged from law-suits involving those, like Peddie, who were outwardly respectable (Hammerton, 1992, pp.102- 18). On 15 November the judge determined that William Cornelius was entitled to explain his case in open court. Witnesses would be called and havers taken in order to establish or otherwise the allegations of consent and connivance (Scotsman, 16.11.1882, p.3).
The prospect of detailed investigation into his private and business affairs and their public disclosure induced Peddie to flee. He left Edinburgh about 17 November 1882 and the next day wrote to his clerk from London that "he was obliged to go from home for a few days" (Times, 1.12.1882, p.7). It was subsequently reported that Peddie had absconded to Spain (ibid., 7.12.1882, p.7). On 22 December 1882 Peddie's property was sequestrated. The trustee revealed realisable assets of 4,656 - insufficient to satisfy his 36 creditors whose claims totalled almost 75,000 (CS318/30/239, Inventory). In January 1883 Cornelius too, was bankrupted (CS3 l 9/2754). On 31 January 1883 The Times reported that Peddie "was buried in Philadelphia two months ago in Potter's field, under the name of John North" (p.9).
Peddie's rapid departure from Edinburgh was immediately perceived by the press as evidence of his guilt. As The Scottish Banking and Insurance Magazine related:
The story was received at first with incredulity , at least as far as the criminal defalcations were concerned . But the fama received its best proof in that its subject took guilt to himself by flight (December 1882, p.266).
The rumours of adultery and extortion induced Peddie's clients and creditors to scrutinise their accounting records . In particular, the suspicions of the Reverend William Peddie, nominal treasurer of the Friendly Society of Dissenting Ministers, were excited. A committee to examine the books of the Society, which had been kept by his brother Donald, was inaugurated (CH3/516/l,  22.11.1882).


22

 
 
Walker:   The criminal upperworld and the emergence of a disciplinary code






Forgery and the misappropriation of fends
By the end of November 1882 the first revelations concerning Peddie's criminality were reported in the Edinburgh press. On 30 November The Scotsman noted that it had been discovered that bills for 8,500 (later revised to 8,050), discounted by the Commercial Bank of Scotland and drawn by Peddie in the name of a coalmaster in Fife, were forgeries (p.4). On the same day the manager of the Commercial Bank informed his board:
... that in consequence of the discovery that certain bills which had been discounted to Donald Smith Peddie, C.A., Edinburgh bore signatures which were alleged to be forgeries he had intrusted the Bank's Law Agents to malce a criminal charge against Peddie and that a Warrant had accordingly been granted for his apprehension . The Board approved of this step and agreed to defray according to customary outlay by the Police for telegrams & handbills with a view to his arrest (Minute Book, Vol.I I, p.21).
The warrant was duly issued on 1 December 1882 and on 2 December it was revealed that the total of forged bills on the Commercial Bank uttered by Peddie might amount to 11,000.5 Itwas also suspected that Peddie had uttered forged bills of 2,000 on two other Scottish banks and had composed deeds relating to heritable property which "are forgeries from beginning to end, even to the registration clause" (Glasgow Herald, 4.12.1882, p.6). Five days later the Chief Constable of Edinburgh issued a notice (see page 24) offering a reward for information leading to Peddie's arrest.
The defalcations committed by Peddie which caused most public outrage concerned his misappropriation of the funds of the Friendly Society of Dissenting Ministers. Having conducted a search of the records in Donald Smith Peddie's office, the committee appointed to investigate the Treasurer's Accounts reported on 6 December 1882 that only 5,000 of the 29,000 investments which were disclosed in the last annual report were secured (CH3/516/1, 6.1.1882; Edinburgh Evening News, 7.12.1882, p.2). At a subsequent meeting of the (140) members of the Society, it was resolved to institute a further examination of Peddie's involvement and to advise on whether legal liability for the frauds rested with the directors, the auditors, the actuaries and/or the treasurer (CH3/516/1 , 20.12.1882). The results of these deliberations were revealed in a comprehensive report which was issued to the members of the Society on 25 January 1883 and printed in
the local press (CH3/516/10; Scotsman, 25.1.1883, p.5). It was shown that the total investments of the Society amounted to 30,940. Of this, 21,840 worth of securities were classified as "bad" due to their being either entirely fictitious (unsupported by deeds) or based on forged documents (CH3/516/10, pp.5-6). A further 4, 100 of assets were considered "doubtful" because it appeared that the investments had been realised but the proceeds were never entered in the Treasurer's   Accounts   maintained   by   Peddie.   The   report   identified  familial


23

 
 
fiii+i'hi@Hlstory   NS Vol 1,No 2  1996


 
Source:  Reproduced with kind permission of The Royal Bank of Scotland  pie.




 
 
Walker: The criminal uppe,world and the emergence of a disciplinary code




collusion, apathetic directors and perfunctory auditing as factors which facilitated the defalcations of the CA. Among his many criminal devices for extracting monies from the Society (particularly during the 1870s) Peddie had assigned bonds to lunatics for whom he had been appointed curator by the courts and credited the funds to his own account (CH3/516/10, p.16).
The report also showed that the Reverend Dr James Peddie was Treasurer of the Society from its inception in 1797 until his death in 1845 (ibid., pp.2-4). After 1833 he enlisted the assistance of his son Donald and as early as the 1840s funds were misappropriated by the treasurers. In 1844, anxious that frauds were not made public , the ageing Reverend Peddie recommended to the Committee of Management of the Friendly Society that Donald should formally succeed him as treasurer. It was decided, however, that Donald, who was not a member of the Society, was ineligible for the position (ibid.). In 1846 Reverend William Peddie was elected treasurer but due to his ignorance of the affairs of the Society, its management was left almost entirely to his accountant brother.
The report into the frauds also revealed that after 1846 the directors had shown increasingly less interest in the investments of the Society and concerned themselves only with scrutinising day-to-day receipts and payments. The annual audit of the accounts of the Society, which consistently revealed a large surplus of funds, had been conducted by two directors (clergymen) in a superficial manner:
... the payments to widows and petty disbursements were  carefully checked, and so were the various items of income ... but the investments themselves (the capital sums) were never ... properly checked with the deeds (ibid.,  p.4).6
The Reverend Dr William Peddie also regretted that:
... it has not been the custom for a long period of time to call for a sight of the bonds and compare and examine them, otherwise the frauds would have been detected. The auditors, like myself, had confidence in my brother ( Scotsman, 4.12.1882 , p.5).


The response of the professional organisation

The public allegations of illicit behaviour by Donald Peddie came to the attention of the office bearers of the SAE via the printed media. In order to understand the reasons why the Council subsequently devised rules for the expulsion of CAs, it is necessary to comprehend the nature of the adverse disclosures which attended the Peddie frauds.
The need for professional Insulation: the depth of public outrage
The circumstances surrounding Peddie's defalcations and their consequences were extensively reported in the press. The Times explained why:
The extent to which crime is facilitated and encouraged by lax methods of conducting  business  receives  frequent  illustration;  but  it  has  seldom   been

25

 
 
CJi+jif,i@Hlstory NS Vol 1, No 2  1996



exhibited more strikingly than in connection with the frauds lately discovered to have been perpetrated on the "Dissenting Ministers' Friendly Society" of Scotland. The story is a very painful one, because of the respectable position of many who are affected by it. It is also one of the most shameful ever laid before the public, because the persons defrauded are the widows and orphans of Dissenting clergymen, many of whom are wholly dependent on the annuities of the society for their livelihood (30.1.1883, p.8).
The fact that Peddie, an overtly respectable professional of mature years who was born into a family of theologians, could commit adultery and perpetrate a fraud on a semi-religious institution to the potential ruination of those deemed most deserving of societal protection, shocked contemporaries:
A VERY cruel blow has been given to an honoured name by the extraordinary course of fraud, immorality, and forgery pursued by Mr Donald Smith Peddie,
C.A ... [who] revealed himself to be a whited sepulchre, the dishonourer of a good name, the devourer of widows' houses, the reckless debauchee, the smooth-faced swindler and forger. The personal part of the horrid story that now fills all men's mouths receives perhaps a keener point from the knowledge that the hoary sinner is in his seventy-fifth year, and has been pursuing a life which would shame a man in "the May of youth and bloom of lustihood," and is positively appalling in a man of advanced years (Scottish Banking and Insurance Magazine, December 1882, p.266).
The press reported that Peddie had been renowned for his high social status, piety, and participation "in every religious movement for the benefit of the people" (Scotsman, 26.1.1883, p.4). He had maintained a facade of being "spotless in business" and had "the general reputation of a trustworthy man" ( ibid.). The contrast between his public benevolence and private villainy to the detriment of 72 widows and a family of orphans induced The Scotsman to comment that "No more painful story of its kind has been told for many a day" ( ibid.). The Reverend Dr William Peddie acknowledged that his brother's misdemeanours had not only caused considerable shock to "the public mind of the country", but also dishonoured God and hurt religion (ibid., 21.12.1882,  p.5).
The abhorrence at the Peddie frauds engendered an outpouring of sympathetic philanthropy. Even before the Friendly Society announced that it intended to remedy the deficiency in its funds by appealing to the public, senior Scottish politicians such as the Earl of Rosebery, and several leading citizens wrote to the press to volunteer contributions for the relief of the innocent widows and orphans (ibid.; CH3/516/l, 25.1.1883). By the end of 1883 the Relief Committee of the Friendly Society had collected  13,249 (CH3/516/2, p.45).
So far as the Society of Accountants in Edinburgh was concerned, the criminal and debauched behaviour of one of its senior number not only suggested that its informal controls on professional conduct were insufficient but also that the perceived public altruism of the chartered accountant was a sham. It appeared to confirm the accusations which were made against the profession  in an   irreverent

26

 
 





article published one year earlier in The Financial Record, Economist, and Railway Review. In "Trickeries of the Professions" the CA was portrayed as a conceited and mercenary character who, under a veneer of selflessness, was driven by an insatiable desire "to overstep his rivals, advance his own interests, and grasp all for himself ' (December 1881, p.281). The article asserted that the active participation of CAs in the church should not be construed as a symbol of devoutness and moral rectitude. Rather, it was an attempt to secure a clientele by nurturing congregational connections and to extend "influence and gain a recognised character for steadiness" (ibid .) . It was also argued that displays of overt public-spiritedness by the CA, such as offering subscriptions to good causes, were similarly motivated by the need to create a favourable impression with potential patrons and thereby "contribute to his own profit" (ibid.) . Peddie's dishonourable behaviour, despite his aura of professional respectability, philanthropy and association with religious institutions, served as a practical illustration of the apparent dichotomy between the public and private faces of the chartered accountant.
The SAE, whose members had acquired "inbuilt attitudes of social superiority and dominance" (Shackleton & Milner, 1996, p.98; Walker, 1988, pp.12-21) over other public accountants was bound to act in order to ensure that the reputation of practitioners was not seriously tainted by the destructive conduct of one of its members.7
The formulation of a disciplinary code
Shortly after the Peddie defalcations broke in the press, the Council of the SAE were called to an urgent meeting to discuss "special business" (Letter Book, 74/1, p.414). On 5 December 1882 the President and Council convened to discuss the measures which might be taken in response to "the very painful rumours, which, within the last few days had gained so much notoriety regarding Mr D.S. Peddie" (Sederunt Book, 2/1, p. 12). The President considered that:
... the uncontradicted narratives in the newspapers are alone sufficient justification for any action the Council may see fit to take: aad I anticipate there will be unanimity in our resolution that his name shall not again appear in the List of Members of the Society (ibid., p.313).
However, as the annual list was not prepared and issued until early in the new year, it was not formally decided to remove Peddie's name from the roll until a meeting of the Council was held on 3 January  1883 ( ibid., p.316).
At the latter meeting it was also resolved that the President, Secretary and law agent of the SAE should formulate a new bye-law giving the Council the "power to expel from the Society, any member who is found guilty of Breach of Trust, fraud or misdemeanour of a similar kind" ( ibid.). This remit was to be acted upon immediately in order that a draft regulation could be presented at the annual meeting of the Society in February. Under the constitution of the SAE the bye-law


27

 
 
Cfi+i'j;j@Hlstory   NS Vol 1, No 2  1996


would have to be submitted to an annual meeting and ratified at the succeeding AGM. Accordingly, the bye-law was adopted by the Society in February 1883 and confirmed unanimously  one year later (Minute Book, 3/2, pp.23fr.7 &  263-4).
The content of the bye-law was heavily influenced by the specifics of Peddie's misconduct. It was also wide ranging and uncompromising in its effort to prevent the profession from being tarnished by the behaviour of an individual miscreant. Public accusations of crime or "any wrong doing" were to be sufficient grounds for the President and Council to institute an enquiry which might result in a recommendation for the expulsion of a member:
It shall be lawful for the Society, in the event of any member being convicted of Falsehood, Fraud and Wilful Imposition, or Embezzlement, or Forgery or uttering any forged document, knowing it to be forged, or of any other crime or misdemeanour to expel such member from the Society: and in the event of any member of the Society being publicly accused of any such crime or misdemeanours as aforesaid, or of any wrong doing sufficient to disqualify him from being a member of the Society, or in the event of any written information to that effect being given to the President or Secretary of the Society, it shall be the duty of the President and Council to make intimation in writing to such member that they will proceed on some day not less than ten from the date of such information, to consider the conduct of such member. and if after such enquiry as they shall deem sufficient, and after considering any explanations which such member may tender, they shall come to be of opinion that the member accused is guilty of such crime or misdemeanour or wrong doing, they shall report the conduct of such member to the first Annual General Meeting of the Society or to any Special General Meeting to be called for that purpose
in terms of the Society's Byelaws, and on a motion being and carried, such member shall be expelled from the Society, in the same manner as if he had been convicted of any such crime or misdemeanour  (ibid., 312, pp.263-4 ,
italics added).
Although there is little evidence to suggest that it was used as a model by the SAE, the bye-law bore some similarities to the rules for expulsion which had recently been codified in the constitution of the ICAEW. The charter of 1880 enumerated six grounds for the initiation of proceedings leading to the possible removal or suspension of a member. These were: a breach of the fundamental rules of the Institute; criminal conviction; behaviour deemed "disreputable to a Public Accountant"; bankruptcy; engagements deemed incompatible with the practice of public accountancy; and, failure to pay subscriptions. However, ejection from the English Institute was only possible following a 75% vote by the Council of the Institute and on the accused having been heard (Accountant, 12.6.1880, p.7).
It is evident from the rules for expulsion which were devised by the SAE and the ICAEW during the 1880s that both organisations were largely concerned with protecting their members from the adverse status consequences of publicised cases of misconduct. A similar emphasis on professional insulation was revealed by   the


28

 
 






Scottish accountancy profession during the 1890s. As part of their attempt to secure the registration of chartered accountants, the Scottish institutes formulated an Accountants (Scotland) Bill in 1896. The draft legislation proposed that a General Council would have the power to refuse to license an accountant who had been convicted "of a crime or a fraud, or to have been guilty of any act or default discreditable to a professional accountant" (Sederunt Book, 2/2, p.240).

Conclusions

The absence from the SAE's early constitution and laws of codified rules pertaining to matters of conduct and discipline, coupled with the perfunctory nature of much contemporary auditing and the professional's ability to maintain an aura of respectability, provided the vocational and cultural environment in which individuals like Donald Smith Peddie could, for many years, covertly lead a dual existence. When the public facade ruptured and the private life was exposed a single practitioner could potentially inflict considerable damage on the reputation of the occupation.
The need to protect the profession from the adversities wreaked upon it by the activities of the malefactor ensured that characters such as Peddie, though a minute fraction of the occupational population, could have as significant and enduring an impact on the institutions of professionalism as their more illustrious peers famed for constructive contributions to the organisation. The grounds for expulsion specified in the bye-law formulated in the wake of the Peddie frauds were to be retained by the SAE as late as the merging of the three local CA societies as The Institute of Chartered Accountants of Scotland in 1951 (Charter of Incorporation, 1944, p.28; McDougall, 1980, p.75). The findings of this paper suggest, therefore, that the institutional development of a profession is not only exhibited in the lives of "its great personalities" (Peloubet quoted in Previts et al., 1990, p.137) but also in the shrouded existence of its more notorious members.
Preston et al. 's findings concerning the emphasis on unwritten rules governing early professional behaviour (referred to here as "etiquette") and the reliance on the "character" of the entrant are supported by this study for an earlier time and place. However, unlike the early organisations of accountants in England, the US and Australia, the devising of ethical codes and disciplinary rules was not employed by the SAE at its formation in the mid-nineteenth century as part of an attempt "to confer legitimacy upon the professional body" (Preston et al., 1995, p.510). When a formal statement on disciplinary matters was later devised by the SAE it was a defensive mechanism necessitated by the publicised activities of a member whose criminal behaviour conflicted with the contemporary perception of the professional ideal. In this sense, Parker's assertion that the propagation of codes is primarily motivated by the "protection of the accounting profession's self-interest" (1994, p.507) is supported.

29

 
 
iiiitUfriffif jHistory NS Vol 1, No 2  1996


The current study has confirmed the particular relevance within Parker's "private interest model" of the professional insulation and status preservation functions of organisational pronouncements. The revelations concerning the defalcations and immorality of Peddie required an institutional response in order to avert a threat to the hard won collective status gains amassed by Edinburgh CAs since 1853. It was also important that the SAE reveal that it had the capacity for instituting structures to enable the punishment of the dishonourable practitioner and thereby establish a potential deterrent.
The case presented here also confirms Parker's contention that the exercise of discipline by the professional organisation is largely emblematic. In the wake of press comment relating to the activities of one chartered accountant, the SAE devised a regulation for the expulsion of members which stood as a symbol to the public that the association would not tolerate unbecoming and discreditable behaviour . The importance of "offence visibility" is also evidenced in the findings of this study. In this instance, the conspicuousness of the offence was not a determinant of the punishment meted out to the individual miscreant. Rather, it determined the formulation of the behavioural standard by which misconduct would be subsequently judged.
The Callender and Peddie episodes also reveal that organisational responses were positively correlated to the volume of adverse publicity which resulted from the activities of dishonourable practitioners . Callender's misdemeanours elicited little press coverage and engendered a correspondingly limited reaction by the SAE. Peddie 's crimes, by contrast, though substantially unproven at the time, were sensationalised. Hence, the organisation not only expunged Peddie's name from the roll, but also acted expeditiously to institute regulations to uphold public confidence in the profession . The grounds for expulsion devised by the SAE in 1883 reveal the organisation's revulsion against any criminal behaviour or alleged act of wrongdoing which permeated the "public" domain and had the potential to discredit the vocation. As Parker has concluded, in matters of ethics and discipline the need to protect the private interest of the profession "is ever present" (1994, p.523).













30

 
 




Notes
1.	The derivation of the terms "criminal upperworld" and "white-collar crime" are explained in Robb (1992, pp.4 , 6 & 193).
2.	Advertising and "touting" were major issues of etiquette during the late nineteenth century, especially in the English accountancy profession (see The Accountant; Howitt, 1984, pp.27-8). Canvassing was associated with trade and  the egoistic quest for "profit". It therefore conflicted with the ideal of the  fee-earning, financially disinterested and service orientated professional (Carr-Saunders & Wilson, 1933, pp.432-41; Duman, 1979, pp.124-7; Reader, 1966, p.159; Walker, 1988, pp.58-9).
3.	The Rules and Bye-laws of the Institute of Accountants and Actuaries in Glasgow also contained a provision which ensured that CAs who were engaged in "the business of a Manufacturer, Merchant, or Law Agent" would forfeit their membership of the Institute (Privy Council, 1890, p.120).
4.	According to Millerson, misconduct is most likely where a sole practitioner is involved in direct client relations, provides a fiduciary service and offers advice in complex matters (1964, p.157).
5.	In November 1883 the actual total of forged bills discounted by Peddie at the head office of the Commercial Bank of Scotland was calculated as 10,678 (the  profits of the Bank during the financial year 1882-3 were 151,105) (Commercial Bank Minute Book, Vol.I 1, p.136). It was also revealed that the forged bills "had been in the circle for several years" (ibid.).
6.	In their report on the accounts to 31 March 1882 the auditors stated that they had "found the Books correctly kept, vouched and summed up". The capital account was also examined "and found correct" (CH3/516/l, 9.5.1882).
7.	Deprecatory articles in The Financial Record, Economist, and Railway Review in 1881 were not the only adverse publicity which confronted the SAE in the period immediately preceding the Peddie affair. In May 1882 the case of Lees v. Todd was decided in the Court of Session. Here, a shareholder raised an action against the directors of the Caledonian Heritable Security Company for issuing false and fraudulent balance sheets. Although the defenders were successful, the case illuminated the perfunctory nature of the audit practices conducted by a CA. Both the manager and the auditor of the company were SAE members and one of the judges referred to their "failure to perform their duty to the company" (Session Cases, 1882, p.852) .








31

 
 
, .,...i'ill@Hlstory NS Vol 1, No 2  1996



