





Editorial



This issue of Accounting History is the first in a New Series (NS) of the journal. It appears as NS Vol.I, No. l. The last issue in the earlier series (Vol.6, No.2) marked the close of Robert W. Gibson's editorship and the contribution of the earlier review panel. Tribute has been paid to Bob Gibson's editorial contribution to Accounting History (1989-1994) and the antecedent publication, Accounting History Newsletter (1980-1989), in an anthology which contains a selection of articles taken from these earlier issues (Carnegie and Wolnizer, 1996). Now relying on the input of an Editorial Board comprising leading international accounting history scholars, Accounting History moves into a new and exciting phase of publication.
Accounting History aims to publish quality historical papers. These could be concerned with exploring the advent and development of accounting bodies, conventions, ideas, practices and rules. They should attempt to identify the individuals and also the local, time-specific environmental factors which affected accounting, and should endeavour to assess accounting's impact on organisational and social functioning.
Accounting History particularly encourages research set firmly in the "archive", which should be understood not in a narrow sense as ledgers, balance sheets and other financial accounting records, but in the widest sense as encompassing all documents, texts and records, in whatever medium, including oral history, that are capable of augmenting our understanding of accounting's past. Encouragement is given to the explicit use of theoretical perspectives drawn from relevant disciplines such as economics, sociology and political theory in conducting investigative, explanatory studies of accounting's past. Accounting History will guard against any counter-productive narrowing of theoretical approaches to accounting history scholarship.
Critical and interpretive research, while focussed on augmenting our understanding of accounting's past, also offers considerable potential to provide insights into accounting's present and future (Carnegie and Napier, 1996). This, in




tum, may lead us to more effectively critique the role, use and impact of accounting today, and to enable more informed evaluations of the rationales for accounting and its expansion. Enhancements in our own self-understandings as accountants are expected to have implications for accounting's future. As accounting increasingly becomes implicated in all our lives, critical and interpretive research is also expected to interest those not immediately involved in the accounting  discipline.
Accounting History accommodates a variety of approaches in the writing of accounting history. Among other approaches, biography, prosopography, business history through accounting records, institutional history, public sector accounting history, comparative international accounting history and oral history are supported and encouraged. A case study based on an individual, a firm or a book offers the potential to identify explanatory variables and accounting impacts for further investigation. It is also crucial to recognise that such studies, in aggregate, offer considerable opportunities to form generalised conclusions about accounting development.
Reflecting its international scope, this issue features contributions written by scholars from the United Kingdom, New Zealand, United States of America and Australia .
Boyns and Edwards investigate the factors which impacted on the dissemination of accounting technology in the Wales' basic metal mining and smelting industries from c.1750 to c.1870. While "industrial accounting" was more concerned with satisfying internal information needs, the accounting literature of this era focussed on external accounting. This led Boyns and Edwards to employ the notion of "change agents" to explore how new accounting techniques and ideas were diffused in the industries under examination. Their study reminds us that inferences about accounting practice in any era based on examinations of the literature may not reflect the "reality" of the past.
By widely interpreting what constitutes the archive, Godfrey and Hooper examine the role of the Domesday Book in accounting history.  Using  the contributions of medieval historians in particular, Godfrey and Hooper focus on elucidating the use of financial and non-financial information collected in the Domesday Survey of 1086 and on assessing, in broad terms, its impact on social functioning. Parallels in the use of Domesday may be drawn with the present as accounting and government policymakers increasingly advocate the adoption of "commercial" accounting systems for public sector financial management. As seen in New Zealand, for instance, valuations of public assets for financial reporting purposes have provided opportunities to implement capital charge regimes and public asset disposal programs. Accounting is thus implicated in the determination of the size and functioning of government and, of course, the consequent social impacts.









Fleischman, Mills and  Tyson's  contribution  is  intended  to  stimulate scholars to experience the challenges and benefits that come  from  exploring  accounting's past. Although many within the discipline take an interest in accounting history, a smaller but fast growing set actually conduct historical research in accounting. Seeking to expand the scholarly focus on accounting history, Fleischman, Mills and Tyson address the possibilities that exist for undertaking accounting  history research and provide insights to assist in the development of a profile in the field. Their contribution  is expected  to be  of  interest  to a  wide audience.
Reviewing the professionalisation literature which  has  grown  rapidly  in the past decade or so, West  illustrates  how  individual  accounting  history  studies  may be drawn upon to contribute to the development of a "bigger picture". Inparticular, West examines the wide range of explanations for accounting's professionalisation and points to a possible connection between our existing knowledge of how accounting became a profession and what is described as "observable and persistent discord in accounting practice and theory". West's call for a rethinking  of  the nature of accounting's profession: tatus and the practices imposed under  its authority  has  implications  for  accounting's  future.
Those with an interest in accounting history scholarship throughout  the world are encou raged  to be  a part of this  new  series of Accounting  History.













7

 
