






Transaction cost economics and nineteenth century fur trade accounting:
relevance of a
contemporary theory

Abstract
In examining how the historical, fur-trading Hudson's Bay Company (HBC) controlled the agency problem, Carlos and Nicholas (1990) concluded that accounting in general was one of the many techniques used. This study expands on the work of Carlos and Nicholas. For the period from 1821 to 1860, it examines original documents in addition to published documents used by Carlos and Nicholas. It uses a specific agency theory - transaction cost economics (TCE). Because of the uncertainty that prevailed through communication lags caused by the great distances, TCE suggests that the HBC would develop extensive directing and monitoring mechanisms and use what is now known as management accounting. The data suggest that the HBC conformed well to the TCE predictions that directing and monitoring mechanisms would be highly developed. The internal accounting had many features comparable to contemporary management accounting.

Keywords: Fur trade accounting; transaction cost economics;Hudson 's Bay Company.

55
 
 




































Introduction
The Hudson's Bay Company (HBC) has operated in Canada continuously since 1670. More importantly for historians, it has preserved documentation on all aspects of its operational history. There exist today, in the Hudson's Bay Company Archives (HBCA), 1 continuous accounting records for this company from 1670 to the present. The accounting records, our primary interest in this study, are comprehensive. That is, there are accounting records for the smallest of trading posts to the largest departments, as well as financial statements for the HBC itself.
HBC historical accounting documents provide an opportunity to study the use of management accounting. Management accounting has not always been identified as such. The term, management accounting, was developed after the Second World War to describe the provision, to management, of statistical information for the purposes of planning, decision-making and control. Edwards and Newell (1991, pp.412-5) have recommended the use of this definition for identifying the existence of management accounting in historical accounting research.
An examination of HBC's management accounting may be able to provide an answer to a larger question. Historians have not been able to fully explain how the HBC and other overseas trading companies operating during the seventeenth, eighteenth, and nineteenth centuries were able to control agent behaviour. Carlos and Nicholas (1990, pp.853-6) addressed this as an agency problem. They recognised that "there existed a tremendous time lag between the issuance of orders in England or Europe and the appearance of commodities from afar''. They argued that the lag contributed to asymmetrical information and uncertainty. The agents had more and better information about the overseas operations, while the principals had more information about the firm. The presence of uncertainty meant that outputs could not be linked invariably with inputs or efforts of agents.
Carlos and Nicholas (1990, pp.857-8) describe the HBC agency problem with private trading as an example. Private trading occurs when agents trade their own goods for furs for themselves rather than for the HBC.
... the harvest of furs was somewhat random. The severity of the winter, disease, or the activity of Indians or competitors had an impact on the level of trading activity. Only the managers in Canada observed the true harvest, not the company. If the supply of furs shipped was low, the directors could not have known whether this was because the harvest was low or because its managers were engaged in private trade. Information asymmetries allowed the private trade problems to exist. The resulting opportunism by managers reduced company profits and increased returns to managers. Firms, therefore, needed to find ways to control their managers or to reduce the level of private trade.
With data based on the HBC archives, Carlos and Nicholas were able to find evidence that the HBC recognised and controlled the agency problem, which went
 



beyond private trading. Three control devices were identified. One was a use of formal contracts to specify expectations. Each manager was hired with an employment contract. Another was to monitor the activities of managers. Some aspects of this monitoring suggested the use of management accounting, for example, a set of internal control mechanisms designed to account for the use of all trade goods. Third, the company created a social structure within the company that dictated against inappropriate behaviour.
The HBC declared private trapping illegal in 1770 (Carlos and Nicholas, 1990, p.867). If HBC managers and employees were not trapping, then they had no opportunity to have personal furs in their possession. Furthermore, Carlos and Nicholas (1993, p.253) argued that by 1810 the HBC "had successfully controlled potential opportunistic behaviour by its managers". Opportunism was not eliminated; it was at a level where benefits from incremental efforts would be worth less than the costs.
The agency problem described by Carlos and Nicholas (1990) had applicability to management accounting, as noted in an earlier paragraph. Transaction cost economics (TCE) is particularly appropriate for management accounting as it provides a theory for understanding how organisations use directing and monitoring information to reduce opportunism (Baiman, 1990, p.346; Williamson, 1991, pp.7fr8). Directing and monitoring information is comparable to management accounting in providing statistical information for the purposes of planning, decision-making and control. TCE will be used to frame the agency problem and to predict the use of management accounting at the historical HBC. The contribution of this paper will be to verify and extend the work of Carlos and Nicholas (1990) with the use a more specific agency theory (TCE) and to examine the control of the agency problem with management accounting.
Carlos and Nicholas (1988, 1990, 1993) and Carlos (1991, 1992) examined the agency problem of the HBC and other chartered companies for an earlier time period (approximately from 1670 to 1810). Milgrom and Roberts (1992, pp.6-9) briefly discussed the HBC's agency problem for the same period as the present paper, but used secondary sources (i.e., Newman, 1988) that had not explicitly addressed the agency problem. No other agency studies of the HBC for the 1821 to 1860 period were found. Moreover, any such research is unlikely to have come from the accounting literature because, as Murphy (1993, pp.3-4) recently noted, the HBC's records have not been  studied.
The paper is structured as follows. There follows a brief description of TCE and a statement of the hypotheses for the existence of management accounting during the study period. The early operating history of the HBC is then briefly summarised as a backdrop for the study period, 1821 to 1860. Then the evidence from the study period is examined to determine if it supports the hypotheses. The fifth and last section presents the conclusions that the HBC was using management
 



accounting extensively during the period. The internal accounting practices of the HBC had the same purposes and were similar to contemporary techniques of management accounting.

The applicability of transaction cost economics

TCE concerns itself with decisions on whether "to use markets for some transactions and hierarchical forms of organization for others" (Williamson, 1988, p.568). Either a market transaction is selected or in-house production is selected. The agency problem is assumed to exist; only the costs of it can be reduced. Two behavioural assumptions are made by TCE. One, bounded rationality, means that economic actors are assumed to be "intendedly rational, but only limited so" (Simon, 1947). Thus, the mind can be considered a resource with limited capacity. The other behavioural assumption explicitly considered in TCE is the self interest orientation of economic actors. TCE assumes the strongest form of self interest, opportunism. Opportunism contains the concepts of both self interest and guile. If the behavioural assumption of opportunism did not hold (i.e., if one or the other of the weaker forms were valid) then governance could be easily and cheaply
maintained through rule making. Everyone would play fair!
With the assumptions of bounded rationality and opportunism, in-house transactions will be preferred over market solutions if asset specificity and/or uncertainty exist. Consider these two dimensions as defined by Williamson (1985, pp.52-61).2 First, asset specificity occurs when an asset has been customised. The customisation reduces production costs, but creates a unique, complicated asset that cannot be easily understood by the market. It is unlikely, therefore, that there will be a ready market for such an asset. This demands in-house production. Moreover, customisation restricts the asset to a narrower application, thereby inhibiting easy and costless redeployment. This further restricts the customised asset to in-house production, where opportunism and maladaptation can be checked by internal organisation. Thus, in-house production is increasingly likely with asset specificity, which Williamson divided into four different types: site (i.e., an advantageous location), physical asset, human asset and dedicated asset.
Uncertainty, the second dimension of TCE, complicates writing and enforcing contracts. Two types of uncertainty are discussed by Williamson (1985, pp.57--60), environmental and behavioural. Environmental changes prevent ex ante understanding of ex post circumstances and thereby lead to incomplete contracts. Behavioural uncertainty exists where agent behaviour is unpredictable and thus not capable of being effectively contracted or specified ex ante. The fundamental problem under the market mode is that even the best contracts are incomplete. In house production is better able to cope because adaptation can be made as needed without   reverting   to  formal  agreements.   Hence,  the  likelihood   of  in-house
 


production is expected to increase with uncertainty.
The assumptions of bounded rationality and opportunism are applicable to the early HBC. The long distances combined with slow transportation and communication systems (by current standards) implies a situation of information impactedness (Carlos and Nicholas, 1990, p 856). Bounded rationality must prevail in this setting. As for the opportunism, there is evidence of a reluctance by traders to negotiate the best trade deals and to work with the best interests of the HBC in mind. Presumably a private agenda and a lack of goal congruence accounted for this reluctance.
In summary, during the period under review the HBC conformed to the assumptions of TCE; namely, bounded rationality and  opportunism. However, does the HBC significantly demonstrate the TCE dimensions of asset specificity and uncertainty? If these dimensions exist, was in-house production selected over market for controlling the agency problem? The use of in-house production suggests that the historical HBC would operate by hiring managers and employees, directing their behaviours, and monitoring their performance. Thus, directing and monitoring mechanisms would be developed to compensate for bounded rationality of the principals and to control the opportunism of agents. Furthermore, it would be expected that significant parts of the directing and monitoring mechanisms could be characterised as management accounting, that is, statistical information for planning, decision-making, and control. The accounting would be expected to take on the attributes of management accounting in addition to recording financial transactions for shareholders.
In contrast, if uncertainty and asset specificity were not significant, then TCE would expect market transactions to prevail over in-house transactions. More specifically, market transactions by the HBC would be expressed by contracting out work and by not hiring employees. Further contracting out would be done for the purchase of specified goods and/or services. There would be no need for directing and monitoring mechanisms to control agent opportunism as what was purchased would be what was delivered. Accounting would be limited to recording financial transactions for shareholders.
With these arguments, our research hypotheses are:
H 1:Significant asset specificity and/or uncertainty was associated with the selection of in-house production to minimise transaction costs.
H2:In-house production was associated with the use of directing and monitoring mechanisms, and the use of management accounting.

The years before 1821

The world's oldest continuously operating commercial company, the HBC was incorporated  in  1670 with  a royal  charter granted  by  the  King  of England. The
 

company was to have a monopoly on trade and commerce for those lands whose rivers and streams drain into the Hudson Bay, the inland ocean bay occupying much of the northeast comer of North America.
For the first hundred years, the approach to fur acquisition was to meet the aborigines at the Bay and convince them to travel north along rivers to the Bay each year. Despite the monopoly given by the King, even in its earliest years the HBC faced competition especially from Montreal to the south. These Montreal competitors traded with the aborigines, or alternatively convinced them to travel to posts in the south. Gradually, the Montreal traders moved west and north along the St. Lawrence River and its tributaries into the Great Lakes. At first, competition was limited in distance by transportation costs. That is, as the distances became greater, the space in canoes became more occupied by provisions for the crew. This left reduced space for the storage of trade goods and furs on the return trip. The problems were solved by building larger birch-bark canoes and by using compact, high protein native com mixed with lard for travel food. This allowed the competing trade to move farther west and north, and for many traders from Montreal to form a partnership named the North West Company (NWC). The formation of the NWC further increased competition for furs.
The HBC moved inland to compete with the NWC. After 1770 the HBC's trade focus shifted from the shores of the Bay to inland posts. By 1800, competition between the HBC and the NWC further intensified and, with the depletion of beaver in many areas, they competed head-to-head farther west, in present day Saskatchewan and Alberta, and later still farther north and west reaching the Arctic Circle and the Pacific Ocean. This trade expansion benefited from pemmican (dried buffalo meat mixed with fat and berries) becoming the travel food.
Both the HBC and the NWC sold most of their furs in the European markets. The Montreal to London ocean distance for the NWC was about the same as the HBC's trip from York Factory on the Hudson Bay to London. However, York Factory was about 1,500 miles closer to the raw fur than Montreal. Milgrom and Roberts (1992, p.8) assessed that the NWC offset this 1,500 miles disadvantage with their organisational structure, which embodied incentives to encourage effort, imagination, flexibility and innovation. Milgrom and Roberts (1992, p.8) add:
The NWC was a partnership, with two classes of partners who shared in the profits of the enterprise. Senior, Montreal-based partners were responsible for finding trade goods and financing and for marketing the furs at the London auctions. "Wintering partners" ran the trade in the field. The two groups met annually at Grand Portage or Fort William to exchange information, set policy, and divide the profits that arose from their efforts. Operating decisions in the field were largely left to the individual wintering partners on site, who could respond quickly and imaginatively and who were well motivated by their ownership shares. Other employees were chosen for their fit with the aggressive, entrepreneurial style that characterized the North West Company and its partners. These people were given real responsibility, performance related pay, and a serious chance to become a  partner.
 
tjfjj'j:fd History   



The HBC responded to the competitive challenge of the NWC by building inland posts, introducing incentive pay and allowing managers more freedom of action. The HBC transformed itself, and the result was more competition and even hostility between the two companies.
Both companies were suffering seriously from their competition. The merger of the HBC and the larger NWC in 1821 - retaining the HBC name - was a solution, but not a panacea. There were still the great distances and high costs with which to contend. Competition still came from American traders along the border and other independent traders, and the aborigines still sought favourable trade conditions.
Despite preserving the name because of the value of the charter, Pinkerton (1931, pp.288-92) argued that the HBC was different after the merger because of the new complement of senior managers. His argument was based on the division of annual profits. The deed poll (terms of agreement for the merger) specified that annual profits were to be divided into one hundred shares. Of these 100 shares, 20 were to go to the NWC (i.e., to William and Simon McGillivray and Edward Ellice), 20 to the earlier HBC, ten were to be invested by the united concern as an emergency fund, five to compensate Ellice and the McGillivrays for the loss of their agency of the NWC, and five were to be used by the earlier HBC to fulfil an arrangement with the heirs of Lord Selkirk (a former majority shareholder).
The remaining 40 shares were to become the property of the wintering partners of the NWC and the traders of the HBC. These 40 shares were divided into 85 parts, two for each chief factor and one for each chief trader.3 Of the 25 chief factors named in the deed poll, 15 were from the NWC and 10 were from the HBC. Similarly, the NWC was over-represented with the chief traders named in the deed poll, 17 compared to 11 for the HBC. On this basis, and the subsequent greater propensity of NWC personnel to be promoted, Pinkerton concluded that the new HBC was substantially influenced by the personnel of the NWC in contrast to the personnel of the old HBC.
The ultimate control remained in London with the new group of owners also represented by a Committee, largely unchanged from the practices of the old HBC. Day-to-day operational control was centralised under George Simpson who was made the inland governor and placed in charge of the amalgamation. He had come to North America with the earlier HBC the year before the merger. The organisation became the largest fur trading company by far in what was to be Canada. Simpson was to consolidate operations, increase control and reduce costs.

Managing the fur trade, 1821 to 1860

The study period was chosen for several reasons. First, the HBC still faced substantial  uncertainty.  There  was  uncertainty  from  the  distance  between  the
 



owners in London, England and the employees in North America. Moreover, there was  uncertainty   with  inland  travel  by  canoe  and  crude  boats,  trade  terms  of European  goods  for furs  and  living  off  the  land.  Second,  during  this  period  the North American operation was under the leadership of one man -George Simpson
- thus, there were no confounding effects from changes in leadership. Third, with the merger and with Simpson who'had little commitment to either company's past practices, management practices were expected to be rationally determined instead of based on past practices. Fourth, the Company was well managed during this period. reflecting that, whether internal organisation or market was used, it worked well. In his recent three-volume study of the HBC, Canadian business historian Peter Newman concluded that only during the Simpson years was the HBC well managed. In this regard, Newman (1991, p.584) wrote:
Except for the occasional jolt of imagination, the Company operated at its maximum effectiveness mainly during the four-decade span when Sir George Simpson ran it, from 1821 to 1860. Unlike his predecessors, Simpson expanded its geographical limits and pushed it well beyond furs into trading lumber, cranberries, frozen salmon and even North Pacific icebergs and glaciers . (His crews sawed off chunks of the appropriate size and loaded them aboard a fleet of leased ships for a quick journey to San Francisco, where the ice was sold for refrigerating meat.) Acting with the hauteur of a man in charge of his private universe, Simpson did any damn thing he pleased and in the process temporarily transformed the HBC into a dynamic and imaginative enterprise.

Asset specificity and uncertainty

There is evidence for the study period that the dimensions of asset specificity and uncertainty existed. Physical asset specificity w.as important at this stage in the HBC's development. Instead of trading on the shores of the Hudson Bay from general purpose sailing ships, the HBC developed specialised (freight) canoes and (York) boats that were simple and light, but designed to travel great distances and to avoid damage in shallow rocky rivers. There was site specificity with inland posts strategically located near aboriginal tribes.
More important, was the development of human asset specificity with the traders. The traders had knowledge, skills and other attributes that enabled the HBC to conduct widely dispersed trade. These traders knew how to gauge fur quality and to price the many furs in terms of trade goods. They knew the wilderness and its rivers and portages. They understood aboriginal customs, and they could speak adequately one or more aboriginal languages. Skill with canoes and boats was essential, and they could live off the land for weeks and even months. Moreover, they had the physical strength to endure the demands and hardships of frontier life. Trader-asset specificity was systematically pursued. It was based on selective recruitment of European youth and the talented offspring of HBC employees   and
 
if fi'j'f:j@ History   NS Vol 1. No 2 1996


aboriginal women. Most of these employees were hired as apprentices during which time they underwent a long period of socialisation and learning.
Uncertainty was the most significant dimension for the HBC. Ocean trips in small sailing boats with the then available navigation tools were precarious. The European end of the business was not a major challenge as there was not the distance problem. As hardly any of the owners of the HBC had been to the posts in North America, this was where there was the most uncertainty. There was uncertainty regarding what commodities to trade for furs, the relative prices, the payment method, how to encourage the aborigines to come to trade and how to live off the land.
The HBC by 1821 traded over a vast area, from Labrador on the Atlantic Ocean to Vancouver Island on the Pacific Ocean, from the United States-Canada border on the south to Great Slave Lake on the north, and included parts of the present states of Washington and Oregon. The mode of transportation among the dispersed employees (1,983 in 1821) and posts (172 in 1821) was the birch-bark canoe. Uncertainty increased with the isolation of employees and the precarious mode of travel.
There was also uncertainty because of the time lag between the shipping of the outfit of trade goods and supplies and the eventual receipt of monies from the sale of furs. This lag might be two or three years to account for the shipment to a Canadian port, off-loading and shipment often more than 1,000 miles by rivers and lakes to inland posts. From there the trade goods were exchanged for furs. The reverse trip was followed to send the furs to market in Europe. At each stage there was uncertainty from possible natural disasters, and at each market there were uncertainties about actual prices.
The evidence for the study period is clear that asset specificity and uncertainty existed. This, acc()rding to TCE, suggests that the HBC would use in-house production instead of contracting with market transactions. The evidence was also clear that the HBC used in-house production or internal organisation for managing operations. This evidence will now be discussed.

Directing resource allocation
As expected, the HBC had well-developed mechanisms to direct agents in order to minimise agency costs. Five mechanisms for directing operations will be discussed: organisation structure, indents, outfits, councils, and standards.
 





Organisation  structure
The HBC organisation structure in 1821 is depicted in Exhibit  1.
Shareholders  elected  a  Committee  to  direct  and  monitor  the  fur  trading operations of the company. The Committee elected the (London) governor and the deputy governor. This governor was comparable to the contemporary  chair of the board; the Committee members and governors had a tradition of actively directing operations.  The  deputy  governor  position  was  there  in  case the  governor  was unavailable.
Upon amalgamation of the HBC and the NWC, the North American operation was divided into two departments, the Northern and the Southern. Each department was headed by an inland governor, who reported to the Committee and/or the London governor. George Simpson was the governor of the larger, Northern department. However, even from 1821 he had at least some responsibility for all departments. In 1826, he replaced the governor of the Southerndepartment to head

Exhibit 1:  Organisation structure 1821
Shareholders
I
Committee
I
Governor,
Deputy Governor
 	I 	

 
Inland Governor Northern Department (York Factory)
 
Inland Governor Southern Department (Montreal)
 

 
Chief Traders, Posts (e.g. Sturgeon Lake)

Source: Numerous sources suggested this general form, however, the structure was never stated explicitly or implied.
 
tiPIUfribM History      NS Vol 1, No 2 1996


all departments (Williams, 1973, p.xii) by which time there were four (Rich, 1938, p.lvii). Nevertheless, it was not until 1839 that he was officially accorded the grand title of governor-in-chief (Williams, 1973, p.xii).
Departments were divided into districts (e.g., Albany) of one or, generally, more posts (e.g., Sturgeon Lake). Each district was normally headed by a chief factor, who reported to the departmental governor. Districts were generally composed of posts which tended to be headed by a chief trader. Large posts were headed by a chief factor; small posts were headed by traders or clerks.
Independent contractors were rarely used, and then only during the summer for bringing trading goods and supplies to posts and taking furs back to ports. Employees were hired by contract regardless of the level in the company. They were listed in alphabetical order in the "Engagement Register" (HBCA, reel 1M853), which recorded: name, age, Parish, capacity, where engaged and date, term and years engaged for service, date contract expires, deserted, dead or home and date, wages and amount of extra services.
Indents
Simpson's thoughts on management were revealed during his first winter (1820-1821) in North America with the pre-merger HBC (transcribed by Rich, 1938, pp.141-69). He had been placed in charge of what was then called the Athabasca department, consisting of five districts. Two of the districts were small and emerging (McKenzie's River and New Caledonia), while the other three (Peace River, Athabasca Lake, Great Slave Lake) were more developed with each consisting of four separate trading posts.
During that winter, Simpson developed a meticulous and thoughtful indent for the Athabasca department. An indent, which became a basic procedure for compiling information for planning and control, was comparable to a two year preliminary budget. Simpson's first indent specified the trading goods,4 supplies for maintaining employees, and the complement of employees. This indent contained nearly 500 different items that were tentatively requested in various quantities and allocated to the five districts and further allocated within three of those districts to 12 posts. Trading goods were listed in alphabetical order from "augers" to "worm gun" and "worsted assorted colours." (Infact, the last entry was "plough shear" which seems to have been overlooked and then entered at the end.)
Simpson's first indent also contained 16 food items, from butter to tea, although, the managers and employees were expected to obtain the majority of their food supplies from their own efforts or through trade. Ten different supply items for canoes were specified, as were seven leather and fur items for posts to make their own clothing. Employee requirements were specified according to three levels, clerks, interpreters and men.
Indents  were  preliminary  budgets  prepared  by  the managers  in charge of
 


posts, districts and departments to communicate or suggest to the Committee in London what should be included in the annual outfit (e.g., HBCA, reel 374). The indent was a mechanism for coordinating the use of trading goods and supplies, which was difficult because of the long time lag between shipping trading goods and the eventual sale in Europe of the furs received from the trade. Although started as a single document, the indent became a series of indents for planning future trade.
Outfits
The outfit had its origin in the very early years of the HBC and the NWC; it was the listing and the actual shipment of trade goods and supplies sent from London to North America for the annual trading exposition with the aborigines. How the Committee determined what was to be included in the annual outfits is not entirely clear. Apparently, they used their judgment and available information, which included the available indents. Nevertheless, the outfit - which was documented in a format comparable to the indent - was the major document used by the Committee to direct the inland governors to trade for furs and to feed and clothe the employees in pursuing that trade.
Inearlier years, the outfit was shipped from London. For the study period, the actual outfit consisted of trade goods and supplies from both London and Montreal, as well as "country produce"5 from North American  suppliers.
Councils
Structural direction was reinforced by the use of departmental councils which generally consisted of chief factors and perhaps chief traders who, along with Simpson himself, interpreted the instructions of the Committee. Council meetings required various members to be at some common location at the same time. Innis in the introduction to Fleming (1940, p.lxxvi) writes that the proposals of the department council were kept in check by the Committee, and in turn the proposals of the Committee were kept in check by the council. Simpson, in effect, acted as an arbitrator getting the employees to achieve what the Committee wanted by minimising or eliminating resistance.
Council meetings confirmed directions, and often in great detail. For example, the 1828 council meeting for the Northern department at York Factory established the following as number 15 of 38 standing rules and regulations: 6
That the [aborigines] be treated with kindness and indulgence, and mild and conciliating means resorted to in order to encourage industry, repress vice and inculcate morality, that the use of spirituous liquors be gradually discontinued, in the few districts in which it is yet indispensable, and that the [aborigines] be liberally supplied with the requisite necessaries, particularly with the article of ammunition, whether they have the means of paying  for it or  not.
That council also established rules and regulations for the prices on food transfers as well for horses and dogs, the scale of wages for all new employees,  procedures
 
,.,,,.,,,,.History	NS Vol 1, No 2 1996





for renewing employee contracts, practices for ensuring preservation of fur animals, and so on.7 There were also regulations for promoting moral and religious improvement of the employees and their families. This was specified as the responsibility of chief factors, chief traders, and clerks in charge of districts and posts.
Standards
The Committee reduced the agency problem by directing the actual exchange of trade goods for furs with a system of exchange rates. There were two parts to this system. First, each post was charged for trade goods at the London invoice price plus all expenses to the tidewater port (i.e., freight, packaging, insurance wages, interest) plus an advance (i.e., a percentage increase over cost), which was set by the Committee to reflect distance and type of goods being carried inland (HBCA, reels 195 and 508). The advance was to cover the costs of inland transportation and operating costs. For example, the Athabasca markup for trade goods and supplies was 33 1/3% (HBCA, reel 689). Second, the Committee also sent Simpson and the chief factors lists of recent furs prices for calculating revenue in terms of pounds sterling (HBCA, reel 508). Thus, the managers of posts were required to determine the "standard of trade" between trade goods and the various furs that would  allow a profit after covering the cost of employe wages and supplies.
Each post had a standard of trade, and it related all other furs and all trade goods to a prime beaver pelt (designated "made beaver"). Individual standards were adjusted for local conditions, distance from York Factory or Montreal, and changes in European fur prices. These standards provided explicit instruction on the amount of furs to be obtained from an outfit. Thus, trade performance could be measured. For example, if one musket equals eleven beaver, then for an expenditure equal to the price of a musket that much fur was expected. The standard could of course be changed, loosened or tightened, although it rarely occurred. Traders were expected to exceed the standard.
Similarly, through agreement by the aforementioned departmental councils, Simpson set travel and transportation standards in physical terms. This was how the HBC established control over the use of company resources, for example, the number of personal packages transported into and out of posts, number of family members travelling with the brigade and how, and the opportunities for chief factors and chief traders to get employees to provide personal service such as cooking. Simpson constantly experimented with routes, the design of canoes and boats, and load weights to reduce the cost per pound shipped. Innis (1956, p.292) writes that careful planning increased the loads of York boats on the North Saskatchewan from 50 pieces in 1822, to 60 in 1825, and 80 in  1833.
The HBC had central, purposeful direction, which would have reduced the agency problem, for example, managers and employees would have known   what
 


the Company wanted at all times. The direction came from the explicit communication of expectations through outfits, indents, and standards. This was reinforced by the formal organisation structure, which consisted of the Committee, councils, the governors, chief factors, chief traders, and other employees. For each, there was accountability for performance. In conclusion, this direction was provided largely by what would now be referred to as hierarchical means. Profit sharing or other high power incentives were restricted to the chief factors and those chief traders sharing in the 40 percent of the profits.

Monitoringresource allocation

Just as the in-house option suggested by TCE indicates the use of directing mechanisms to reduce the agency problem, it also indicates the use of monitoring mechanisms. The HBC had well developed monitoring mechanisms. The following six mechanisms were used by the HBC for systematically compiling information: inventory records, accounting records, journals, operational data, Simpson's annual review of performance, and council meetings.
Inventory records
For a trading organisation, inventories of trade goods were highly important for success. Similarly, because the HBC was responsible for the feeding and clothing of employees, supplies were equally important. This led to a detailed system for keeping track of inventories, including country produce. The records were kept at York Factory and Montreal in both monetary and physical terms, showing the location of each item, either at a port or at an inland depot (HBCA, reel  1M839).
Physical inventories were recorded annually (June 1). This became the starting point for the indents. From the inventory records, the clerks prepared a "scheme distribution", 8 that is, a planned distribution of trade goods and supplies from existing inventories for the current year and the next, to meet expected trade by post. When the outfit for the current year arrived, a "scheme indent" was developed. This specified what the council thought the post outfits needed for the next two years. Subsequently, the master indent was prepared; it was the basis for the importation of trade goods and supplies for the subsequent two years. The relationships among the inventory records and the various indents are shown in Exhibit 2.
The store balance book reconciled the stock of supplies held in the depots with the distribution of supplies for each outfit (HBCA, reel 1M689). This was a very detailed document showing where everything was, by category of goods. Thus, detailed book balances were generated for comparison to actual. In addition, this record reconciled opening inventory, receipts of supplies, distribution of supplies and ending inventory.
 


Exhibit 2. Outfit 1844, for planning trade goods and supplies
Planninghorizon
June 1, 1843	1844	1845	1846	1847

Inventory recorded

Scheme distribution	 	  1843-44
Scheme indent 1843
Master indent by post 1843
Importation from London for outfit 1844

Note: These documents, except for the 1844 outfit, have a common preparation date. For this example it was the Spring of 1843. The 1844 outfit was a result of the other documents.
Source:   May ( 1987, pp.4 6).

Accounting records
North American accounting was to furnish the Committee in London with the cost of the furs from each district (HBCA, reel 508). With that cost information, and the prices from actual fur sales, the London office was able to calculate profitability, and thereby evaluate the HBC traders. This was done with the grand ledgers kept in London; they were the account balance sources for preparing the financial statements for the shareholders (i.e., the Committee) on the basis of outfits rather than calendar years (HBCA, reel 238). Additional charges were assigned in London to the departments for: insurance, duty, shipping costs, general expenses of the outfits, and the general expenses of the London operation, interest costs, and exchange charges (HBCA, reel 508).
Basic bookkeeping entries were made using debits and credits with documents comparable to the double-entry bookkeeping practices that Hamilton (1788) advocated for a trading firm (HBCA, reels 1M591 to 1M593). The district chief factors were responsible for maintaining the district accounting records and delivering those records to York Factory or Montreal.
 
Roy a.Sprukman: Transaction cost economics and nineteenth century fur trade


Prior to sending the district accounts to London, profits could be determined with the use of a "uniform scale of prices" based on recent past sales (HBCA, reel 508). These standard prices had to be used, as actual prices would not be known until the sale of the furs which might take months or even years. Profitability was estimated with the country accounts for departments and districts (HBCA, reel 508) but seldom calculated for posts (see HBCA, reel 1M567 for an exception), perhaps because of the cost or level of difficulty with allocating common costs. When post profitability was estimated, it was probably initiated by chief factors or Simpson to gauge relative post profitability.
Because of the lags between shipping of outfits and the eventual sale of the furs from those trade goods, an outfit took two to three years for the books to be closed. Thus, for any given calendar year there were two or three active outfits for accounting purposes.
Specifically, the North American accounting records (i.e., the "country accounts") supplied London with district account balances.9 These records were kept according to outfit, for example, during 1822-1823. The records separately accounted for trade goods and supplies. For each, the records indicated inventories on hand at the beginning of the period, shipments received during the period, remaining inventories at the end of the period, and inventories used during the period. This cost was adjusted for inventories received from, or shipped to other districts during the period. Costs for storage were included in these costs of trade goods and supplies. Employee wages and salaries were recorded by employee, and the total of those costs was charged against the returns from an outfit.
Severn House for the year 1843 will be used as an example of district account books. There were four major books (HBCA, reels 1M591 to 1M593). The first was the (aboriginal) book. This was a detailed list by aboriginal trapper of debits and credits in terms of "made beaver", that is, in the currency of prime beaver pelts. This operated like an accounts receivable book. The debits were for trade goods provided by the HBC to the trapper. The credits were a list of all furs received. Balances were taken periodically, and there was an index at the front of the book to assist readers in tracing the accounts for the various trappers.
The second was a book recording the use of provisions in maintaining the posts. The entries were made by month, with columns for 10 different food items, for example, ducks. A third book was labelled, "articles in use". It was a listing of assets being used by the posts in carrying out their responsibilities, for example, iron oval kettles. The fourth book was the "expenditure outfit". This document, like the indent and outfit, listed trade goods and supply items in alphabetical order. More importantly, it was a means of reconciling inventories with expenditures. It specified by item in physical terms, the beginning inventory and the outfit added to inventory for the total stock available for business. From that total, the ending inventory was subtracted to equal the expenditure for the period. It also had a column for requesting the subsequent outfit.
 


Journals
Inaddition to maintaining accounting records, the senior employee at each post was to maintain a narrative 'journal" of daily activities (e.g., HBCA, reel lMl 16). This was a record of what was done by employees each day, a list of aborigines coming to trade, etc. The purpose was to provide the Committee with "a better understanding" of the fur trading transactions.
In 1822, the London deputy-governor and Committee wrote the following to Simpson (HBCA, reel 40):
Regular journals must be kept by every person in charge of a department or trading station, and not considered mere matter of form and left to the clerks or apprentices.
In these all material occurrences ought to be entered and the dates of departure from the depot and arrival at wintering station and also at the principal intermediate places noted.
Reports ought also to be made of the state of the departments and improvements suggested: copies of the journals ought to be annually sent to us.

Operational data
These data were important. Inland operations were tracked in physical terms. The physical recording of inventories was noted previously. Distances and load weight were recorded. The use of operational information was reinforced by Simpson. Rich (1958) described Simpson during the study period as having "... to see the problem on the ground and to discuss it with those engaged on  it".
In correspondence to the Committee, Simpson discussed the advantage of visiting a post (HBCA, reel 195). He said "It furnished me with a great deal of valuable information which I trust will be turned to good account ..." Moreover, he intended to present some of the abuses to the council in order to get their concurrence in checking the abuses and reducing expenses. He realised that employees were not always aware of shortcomings and that outsider observations were insightful, that is, "it frequently happens that a stranger perceives many things which from custom escape the observation of long residents".
Simpson's annual review of performance
Simpson and chief factors visited the posts to review their operations, accounting records and journals. Much importance was placed on the accuracy, detail and neatness of accounting records and journals, which were sent to the Committee annually. These visits and documents also provided important sources of information for Simpson's annual report to the Committee, clearly foreshadowing modem management accounting. The actual performance of each post and district was compared to expected for that year and to the past and to expectations for the future. This was comparable to variance analysis with objectives put forth for the
 


post and district's future. The following abbreviated excerpt from an annual report to the Committee is a typical example of Simpson's discussion of a district and its posts.
Cumberland.  This  district  not  withstanding  the  length  of  time  it  has  been occupied and the great number of [aborigines] by which it is frequented, many of whom are stragglers from other parts of the country keeps in tolerably good condition.  This  is  owing  to  the  attention  of  the  [aborigines]  being  almost entirely  devoted  to  the  hunting  of  muskrats  in  reasons  favourable  to  those animals, when the more valuable of the fur bearing race are allowed to increase undisturbed. No district in the Northern department has realized so much profit for the capital employed therein since the coalition as that Iam reporting on, as although  its  profits  were  below  par,  some  seasons  they  mounted  up  in  an extraordinary  degree in others, the increase  and  decrease of its staple article muskrats being influenced by the state of the waters and the increase of trade not bringing with it a corresponding increase of expense as in other parts of the country. ... Some of the [aborigines] belonging to this district were induced to visit  Red  River  Settlement  last  summer  by  the  exaggerated  reports  which reached them of the liberality of our American opponents at Pembina, but they brought  no  furs with  them  and  finding  that  the  rat  hunts  had  failed  in that quarter and that the Saulteaux who reside at and near the Settlement were in worse condition than themselves, they returned forthwith, which will have the effect of removing the discontent which these reports have occasioned not only on  Cumberland  but  extending  event  to  the  plain  districts  and  some  of  the Chippewa lands. The Establishment  of people in this district is very low, not exceeding  six  regular  servants,  but  as  the  [aborigines]  are  quiet  and  well disposed  that  complement  is  sufficient  to  establish    the  temporary  post  of Moose Lake as well  as Cumberland  House  ... The use  of  spirituous  liquors, which is still continued in this district, not as an article of trade, to which it has not  for  a  length  of  time  been  applied  in  any  part  of  the  country,  but  as  a occasional treat to the [aborigines] in consideration  of good conduct  or as an excitement  to  industry,  occasions  much jealousy  among their  neighbours  in English River, where it is entirely prohibited, we should therefore admit  none into this quarter were we not apprehensive that, in order to obtain it, they might take their returns to the American establishments  in the neighbourhood  of the Red  River, which they could  easily  do as the journey  thither  would  be  little more than a pleasant  summer excursion to them. We mean however to sound them upon it, but shall not enforce the measure it they be violently opposed to it. (HBCA, reel  196).

Council  meetings
The council presented an opportunity to share information and to pool experience. They viewed performance of the posts and HBC in total. Inconsistencies among posts could be easily noted. The Committee received the same post records and journals which they apparently read, along with Simpson's annual reports on post results.
Evidence of the use of council meetings to share information is found in council minutes. Typical is the preamble to the minutes for Northern  department's
 
,.,,..,.,,..History	NS Vol 1. No 2 1996




1825 council meeting which state, "... to investigate the result of the trade of last year and determine the outfits and arrangements of the current year  ..."10
In summary, for the study period there is substantial evidence that the HBC systematically gathered information on the performance of managers and employees that would have enabled the monitoring of the agency problem. This information would have been useful in pointing out shirking and in initiating actions to curtail that shirking. It included basic accounting information for preparing reports to shareholders and, in addition, operational information in terms of inventory, journals, and operational results. All of this information was interpreted, digested and communicated through council and Committee meetings and Simpson's annual reviews of performance by post.

Discussion and conclusions
The accounting records and related documents were examined for the study period. The first hypothesis was supported. There was significant asset specificity and uncertainty, and, as expected, in-house production was selected to minimise transaction costs. Market incentives were used minimally, and only with the profit sharing of senior managers. Uncertainty existed, as noted, because of the long distances and time lags between giving orders in London and the eventual receipt of furs from the posts in North America. The HBC also developed asset specificity in terms of post sites, physical assets, and human assets (i.e., traders).
The second hypothesis was also supported. Directing and monitoring mechanisms were well developed for ensuring that the managers and employees complied with the Committee in London. In support of the second hypothesis, the following mechanisms were observed: Directing mechanisms - an organisation structure for directing employees, councils for confirming and reaching agreement on directions, indents for planning trade activities for future years, outfits for specifying next year's trading activities, and standards for specifying the results to be obtained from trade goods and employee efforts - and Monitoring mechanisms
- inventory records for keeping track of trade goods and supplies, accounting records for determining costs and profits, journals for recording operational activities, operational data for tracking non-accounting performance, council meetings to exchange information and assess performance, and Simpson's annual reviews of performance to compile and communicate all significant aspects the year's business.
Directing and monitoring mechanisms were integrated and thereby formed a system. The inventory records were the basis for creating the indents. The master indent was a major component for developing the outfit, which along with the standards of trade set expectations for the trade performance. Monitoring information  and data - from the  accounting  records, journals,  various operating


74
 


data, council meetings, and Simpson's annual review - were used for developing the outfits and thereby directing the organisation and its many parts to achieve the performance embedded in the outfit.
The criteria of Edwards and Newell (1991) allows the conclusion that many attributes of the HBC's internal organisation or in-house production were comparable to management accounting. The accounting went beyond recording financial transactions to report to the shareholders. In other words, the HBC used "statistical information for the purposes of planning, decision-making and control". The indents and outfits were similar to contemporary plans and budgets; they, along with the standards, provided numerical and statistical information for planning operations. As planning devices, they provided targets against which to compare actual operations. The organisation structure contained the essence of responsibility accounting for controlling costs. The council meetings were convenient for exchanging information for planning, decision-making and control of operations. Other information came from the inventory records, journals, cost and profit reports by districts and posts, various performance data, and the annual review of performance by post.
This  study's  evidence  supports  the  Carlos  and  Nicholas  (1990)  conclusion that the  HBC  controlled  the agency  problem  by  monitoring  activities.  It extends that general conclusion of Carlos and Nicholas by examining the evidence with  a precise  agency theory -TCE - and hypotheses. The findings supported the TCE based   hypotheses   that  the  prevailing   uncertainty   and  asset  specificity   would encourage the HBC to control the agency problem with in-house production using monitoring  and directing mechanisms.
 
bi'iii:lffl HISlll!y	NS Vol 1,No 2 - 1996


Notes
1.	The HBCA is located at the Manitoba Archives in Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada. The archives cover the entire company history except the last 30 years, which are treated as confidential. All materials have been microfilmed. Researchers access materials via microfilm. Distant researchers can borrow reels. The materials for the 1821 to 1860 period are in relatively good condition, that is, nearly everything can be read at a paced speed. There is a cumbersome, hand-written index that describes in a few words or sentences the contents of each of the thousands of reels; it is also available on microfilm.
2.	Williamson (1985) actually mentions three dimensions. The third, frequency or size, was excluded because with less than 2,000 employees in 1821, the HBC was not considered to be large. The other two dimensions - asset specificity and uncertainty
- were more significant.
3 Fifty of the 85 shares went to chief factors and 28 to chief traders, while the remaining seven were held for retired employees for seven years before being assigned to new appointees (Innis, 1956, pp.284-85).
4. For this indent, Simpson actually called it an "outfit" as noted by Rich's (1938) transcription of Simpson's correspondence and documents. Simpson either used the term outfit incorrectly or he intended it to be a suggestive outfit, rather than the actual outfit which was specified by the London Committee. Nevertheless, indent was the term subsequently used for these preliminary budgets. Rich (1958) called this document an indent rather than an outfit, the word actually used by Simpson.
5.  Country  produce  was  a commonly  used  term to describe  indigenous  foods   and
products such as pemmican (dried meat and berries) and canoes.
6.	These council minutes were recorded verbatim in Fleming (1940, pp.218-31).
7.	For examples of Northern Department council meeting minutes, see Oliver (1914, pp.637-88; 1915, pp.689-871).
8.	This discussion on the development of the various indents from the inventory records was summarised from May (1987, pp.47-68).
9.	Only one source could be found for explaining how the accounting records were compiled. This information was contained on reel 508 in the form of a memorandum entitled "Directions for Keeping Accounts", and the author was Edward Roberts. The date was unclear, but the archivists at the HBCA had previously deemed the date to be 1843. The document was transcribed with difficulty. There were two parts. The first was an update of previous accounting instructions. The second was the previous instructions dated 1823 with reference to practices and accounts for 1819, 1821-22, and 1822-23.
10.	The minutes were transcribed by Fleming (1940, p.101).
 


